11-25: Self-sufficiency and the Court of Appeal decision in WV

Contents                        Paragraphs


Introduction                    1


The Court of Appeal decision


Background                      2–6


Affected claims                 7


List of relevant legacy
                                8
benefits


Actions for DMs                 9 – 11


Relevant determination date     12


Annotations


Contacts




Introduction

1. The purpose of this memo is to


      1.1. inform Decision Makers (DMs) following a judgment at the Court of Appeal (CoA) handed down

      on 29 November 2024 in the case of SSWP v Versnick and Another [2024] EWCA Civ 1454 1 (WV).
      The CoA found that certain EU/EEA nationals who rely on their partners’ legacy benefits may be
      considered as self-sufficient under specific circumstances and so potentially be entitled to State
      Pension Credit (SPC).


      1.2. instruct DMs how to proceed with affected cases.


                                                 1 SSWP v Versnick and Another [2024] EWCA Civ 1454
The Court of Appeal decision




Background
2. The claimant, WV, is a Belgian national who came to the UK in May 2017 and married his British
spouse, J, in June 2017. WV was granted pre-settled status (PSS) under the European Union Settlement
Scheme (EUSS) in November 2019. WV never worked in the UK but after their marriage he, effectively,
lived on J’s income-related Employment and Support Allowance (ESA(IR)) and other benefits paid to J
(Personal Independence Payment, Child Tax Credit, Child Benefit, and Housing Benefit), plus the Carer’s
Allowance (CA) paid to WV for caring for J from September 2017. When WV joined the household, J
started receiving the couple rate of ESA(IR) with a couple rate enhanced disability premium and carer
premium. She then subsequently lost her Severe Disability Premium, as she now had a carer living with
her and WV’s CA income was deducted from her ESA(IR) applicable amount. This meant that the overall
amount of ESA(IR) paid to J had decreased.


3. Following a move to a new local authority area in 2020, J was required to make a claim to UC. J and WV
made a joint claim to UC on 28 July 2020. As a British national who was habitually resident in GB, J was
considered entitled from the date of claim and was awarded UC as a single person. WV was made an
ineligible partner as he was considered not to have a qualifying right to reside for the purpose of claiming
UC.


4. WV has appealed this decision at the Upper Tribunal (UT) and CoA, successfully arguing that at the
date of claim he had a right to reside as a self-sufficient person and should have been awarded UC.


5. When assessing self-sufficiency, EU case law1 has previously found that it is not relevant to consider
the origin of resources. However, in WV, the CoA accepted the SSWP’s argument that resources which
come from social assistance (even when received indirectly) can be distinguished from other types of
resources and that the purpose of the EU legislation is to allow member states to take steps to prevent
an imposition on its social assistance system (para 70). It is therefore permissible to look at the (direct or
indirect) origin of social assistance resources if an EU/EEA citizen’s presence in the household increased
the amount of social assistance payable.


1 C-200/02 Chen v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] QB 325; C-408/03 Commission
      of the European Communities v Belgium [2006] 2 CMLR 41; C-218/14 Singh v Minister for Justice and
Equality [2016] QB 208; C-93/18 Bajratari v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] 1 CMLR
                                                                                                           29.


6. When WV joined the household with J, the amount of ESA(IR), which is a social assistance benefit,
payable to J, who is a British citizen, decreased. Thus, the CoA ultimately found that when WV exercised
his free movement rights, the burden on the UK’s social assistance system decreased (para 71). The CoA
held that there must be a causal link between the exercise of free movement rights by an EU/EEA
national and the imposition of a burden on the social assistance system of the host state (para 68).




Affected claims
7. Whilst the CoA decision concerned a claim to UC, it is considered that the decision also has
implications in respect of claims to SPC. DMs should therefore proceed on the basis that an EU/EEA
national, who relies on Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38/EC may be considered as having been self-
sufficient for the purpose of claiming SPC when


            1. they have PSS, and


            2. they do not have any other right to reside, and


            3. they are the partner of either a UK national, an individual with EUSS settled status, an
            individual who has acquired a permanent right to reside through free movement rights, or a
            third country national (TCN) with recourse to public funds (see note 3), who are in receipt of
            legacy benefits for which the benefit award was calculated at the couple rate (listed in
            Paragraph 7), and


            4. their presence in the household means that the amount of legacy benefits either
            decreases or stays the same, and


            5. they make a claim for SPC for the couple.


Note 1. The partner could also be a TCN in receipt of social assistance who does not have a no resource
to public funds condition on their grant of leave. The TCN must not be relying on any form of
family/derivative freedom of movement right and must have come in via a different immigration route.


Note 2. The previous legacy benefit would have been claimed only by the partner but paid at a couple
rate (the exception being Child Tax Credit which does not have a couple rate).


Note 3. Where the partner was not in receipt of a legacy benefit immediately before the EU/EEA national
then makes a claim for SPC for the couple, their SPC claim will not be affected by this CoA decision.


Note 4. In some circumstances, single claims may also be affected, such as single EU/EEA claimants who
have previously been in a couple receiving legacy benefits and who assert self-sufficiency on the basis of
such legacy benefits as set out above, but whose relationship has now ended. Such cases should be
referred to DMA (Leeds) for further advice.
List of relevant legacy benefits
8. The following legacy benefits are relevant for the purposes of paragraph 6.3 above, when establishing
the benefit history of the partner on affected claims:


      1. Income-Related Employment and Support Allowance


      2. Income-Based Jobseeker’s Allowance


      3. Income Support


      4. Housing Benefit


      5. Working Tax Credit


      6. Child Tax Credit


Note. Relevant legacy benefits are means-tested benefits that allow couple rate payments (excluding
Child Tax Credit which does not have a couple rate), for which a claimant’s partner does not have to
satisfy a right to reside test.




Action for DMs

9. If a claim falls within scope of the WV judgment (described in paragraph 6), the claimant can be
deemed to have a qualifying right to reside on self-sufficiency grounds up to the point of claim. DMs

should then undertake a Brey proportionality assessment 1, which involves an assessment of whether
ongoing social assistance payments (up to the point of potential settled status) would constitute an
unreasonable burden such that the claimant’s self-sufficiency right to reside ceases. If it can be deemed
by the DM that granting SPC would not be an unreasonable burden, the individual would continue to have
a right to reside as a self-sufficient person going forward, and the SPC claim would be allowed at a
couple rate.


                                                         1 Pensionsversicherungsanstalt v Brey C-140/12


10. If a claim does not fall within scope of the WV judgment, the EU/EEA national should be treated as an
ineligible partner and the partner (UK partner, partner with domestic settled status under the EUSS,
partner with a permanent right to reside, or TCN partner) should be awarded UC as a single claimant (as
long as all other entitlement requirements for UC are satisfied).


11. Claims and mandatory reconsiderations which have been identified to fall within scope of WV should
be reviewed using the information and scope set out within this memo.
Relevant determination date

12. The decision in WV is a relevant determination1. The date of the determination is not that of the CoA
decision, but the UT decision. Therefore, the date is 15 May 2023. The decision only applies from that
date onwards.


                                     1 Social Security Act 98, s 27, 2 SSWP v WV [2023] UKUT 112 (AAC)




Annotations

The number of this memo should be annotated against the following paragraphs of the DMG: 073244–
073246.




Contacts

If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E
zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such referrals should be followed, as set out in –
Memo 7/19 Requesting case guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.




                                                                               DMA Leeds: October 2025
