Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                 Annex 1


         Annex 1

         Retirement Pension frozen rates pre-
         1.10.89

         Category A Retirement Pension on own insurance only

         Person outside Great Britain at date of award

1        Category A Retirement Pension is paid at the rate in force on the first date of
         entitlement. To be entitled to Retirement Pension a person must

         1.   give notice of retirement and

         2.   claim

2        The rate of Retirement Pension is increased by the uprating before the accepted
         date of retirement or date of entitlement where that person

         1.   gives late notice of retirement or

         2.   claims late


         Previously entitled to Category B Retirement Pension

3        Usually a person may become entitled to Category A Retirement Pension having
         been entitled to Category B Retirement Pension from an earlier date. This may
         happen where a woman entitled to Category B Retirement Pension as a widow later
         retires and becomes entitled to Category A Retirement Pension.

4        Where this happens the rate of Category A Retirement Pension is restricted to the
                                                                           1
         rate at the date of entitlement to Category B Retirement Pension .
                                                                        1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                Annex 1


         Substituted Category A Retirement Pension

5        There is no restriction to any uprating Order before that current at entitlement
         where at the date on which entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension using
         substituted arises

         1. the former spouse has neither died nor retired nor been deemed to have retired
             before 1.1.89 or

         2. the former spouse has retired or been deemed to have retired before 1.10.89
             but was then and at the last uprating date continued to be ordinarily resident
             in Great Britain.

6        The only exception to this is where a woman not ordinarily resident in Great Britain
         is receiving a Category B Retirement Pension on her husband's contributions at the
         date of divorce. In this case Category A Retirement Pension using substitution will
         be restricted to the rate in force at the date of her entitlement to Category B
         Retirement Pension.

         Widow not entitled to Widow's Benefit

7        The rate of substituted Category A Retirement Pension is restricted in the same way
         as personal Category A Retirement Pension (paragraph 1) where the widow is not
         entitled to Widow's Benefit before pension age (paragraph 11).


         Widows entitled to Widow's Benefit at pensionable age,
         widowers, divorced

         Men and women

8        The rate of substituted Category A Retirement Pension is restricted to the earlier of

         1. the date of retirement (including deemed retirement) of the former spouse if he
             or she was then not ordinarily resident in Great Britain or

         2. the date on which the former spouse ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great
             Britain subsequent to the date of retirement or

         3. the date of death of the former spouse or

         4. the date of entitlement to any Category B Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                Annex 1


         Previously entitled to Category A Retirement Pension

9        Where after reaching Pension age and becoming entitled to Category A Retirement
         Pension at less than the standard rate a man is widowed, or a man or woman is
         divorced, the substituted Category A Retirement Pension is restricted to the rate
         payable at the earlier of

         1. any date for restriction identified under paragraph 8 or
                                                                                                  1
         2. the date of entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension without substitution .
                                                                       1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg. 5(3)(c)


10       Substituting contributions gives grounds for reviewing the existing award of
         Category A Retirement Pension. Therefore the date that the Retirement Pension is
         restricted to cannot be later than original date of entitlement to Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                         Annex 1


         Topped up Category A Retirement Pension

11       A person is entitled to a composite Category A Retirement Pension (topped up)
         where, but for the provisions preventing dual entitlement, that person is entitled to
         both Category A and Category B Retirement Pension.


         Basic pension

12       Where because of contributions deficiency the rate of Category A Retirement
                                                  1
         Pension is less than the standard rate , the amount of basic pension can be
         increased by the lesser of
                                                                 1
         1. the amount it falls short of the standard amount or
                                                      2
         2. the Category B Retirement Pension .
                                                                     1 SS CB Act 92, sec 44(3)(a); 2 sec 52(2)


13       Where the surviving spouse is not ordinarily resident in Great Britain the amount of
         the top up is restricted to the rate in force at the later of

         1. the surviving spouse's date of retirement or
                                                                                                1
         2. the date on which he or she was last ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                                 1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 4(3)


14       In some cases this may mean that no composite pension can be awarded. This is
         because the Category A Retirement Pension is equal to or greater than the standard
         Category A Retirement Pension at the date of retirement. This may occur, for
         example, where a person makes a late claim some time after deemed retirement
         age and therefore is awarded the Category A Retirement Pension rate current at the
         date of entitlement.

         Married women

15       Category A Retirement Pension paid to a married woman can be “topped up” where

         1. she is not entitled to full rate Category A Retirement Pension and

         2. her rate of Category A is less than the standard rate of married woman's
             Category B.

16       The rate of Category A is increased by the lower of the amount

         1. that the person's Category A Retirement Pension is below the standard rate
             of Category B Retirement Pension or

         2. of her rate Category B Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                   Annex 1

17       Where a married woman is not ordinarily resident in Great Britain the amount of the
         “top up” is restricted to the rate in force at the later of

         1. her date of retirement or
                                                                                    1
         2. the date on which she was last ordinarily resident in Great Britain
                                                                             1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 4(3)

         Total rate of topped up category A Retirement Pension

18       The total Category A Retirement Pension cannot be more than the standard rate of
         Retirement Pension at the later of

         1. the date of retirement or

         2. the date on which the claimant ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.

19       Where unusually a married woman is entitled to Category B Retirement Pension
         before Category A Retirement Pension

         1. the total of “topped up” Category A cannot be more than the rate in force when
             she retired and

         2. the “top up” is restricted to the rate in force when her husband retired.

         Composite pension is made up of Category A at 1988 rates plus Category B at 1987
         rates but cannot exceed the standard Category B Retirement Pension in the 1988
         uprating.

20       The rate of composite basic pension is restricted only by the standard rate of
         Category A Retirement Pension then in force where
                                                                                                 1
         1. a widow is entitled to Category B Retirement Pension without having retired and

         2. she later becomes entitled to composite Retirement Pension.
                                                                                   1 SS CB Act 92, 49(4)


21       This is because in her case the date of retirement coincides with the date of the
         later entitlement. If the date of her entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension is
         later than the date of her retirement, the composite pension remains restricted to
         that in force at the date of her entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension if later
         than the date of her retirement, the composite pension remains restricted to that in
         force at the date of her retirement. In either case the amount of

         1. Category B Retirement Pension used in the calculation remains restricted to the
             rate in force at the date of widowhood and

         2. Category A Retirement Pension is restricted to the rate in force at the date of
             widowhood or, if later, the date of entitlement to Category B Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                              Annex 1


         Entitled to Category A and Category B at same date

22       Where a surviving spouse or married woman is entitled to both Category A
         Retirement Pension and Category B Retirement Pension from the same date the

         1.    total rate of “topped up” Category A is restricted to the rate in force at the date
               of retirement and

         2.    the Category B “topped up” is restricted to the rate in force when the spouse
               retired.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                        Annex 1


         Topped up additional pension

         General

23       Where the surviving spouse is not entitled to the maximum rate of additional
                 1
         pension the rate of additional pension can be increased by the lower of

         1. the amount by which it falls short of the maximum or
                                                                                               2
         2. the additional pension included in the Category B Retirement Pension .
                                                  1 SS (additional pension) Regs, reg 2; 2 SS CB Act 92, 52(3)


         Survivor over pension age

24       The rate of additional pension is restricted as set out in paragraph 25 where at the
         date of the spouse's death the surviving spouse was

         1. over pension age and

         2. not ordinarily resident in Great Britain.

25       Where paragraph 24 applies the topping up additional pension cannot be more than
         the amount needed to increase the rate of additional pension to the maximum rate
         of additional pension at the later of

         1. the date the surviving spouse was last ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                     1
         2. 6.4.79 .
                                                                                 1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 4(4)


         Woman widowed under age 60

26       The restricted on the topped up of additional pension in paragraph 25 does not
         apply where a woman is widowed under age 60.

         The topped up additional pension is restricted to the maximum at the date of her
         entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                Annex 1


         Graduated Retirement Benefit

         Own graduated Retirement Benefit

27       Graduated Retirement Benefit payable on a person's own insurance is restricted to
         the rate in force at the later of

         1. the date of entitlement to Retirement Pension or

         2. the date on which the person ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.

28       This means that in some cases the graduated Retirement Benefit will be payable
         under a later Uprating Order than the Retirement Pension of which it has become an
         increase. The position on this is as follows

         •      graduated Retirement Benefit with Category A Retirement Pension is
                restricted to the rate in force at the later of the date of entitlement to Category
                A Retirement Pension or the date ordinary residence in Great Britain ceased.

         Accordingly graduated Retirement Benefit is restricted to the same date as Category
         A Retirement Pension (paragraph 1) except in the case of a widow entitled to
         Category B Retirement Pension from an earlier date (paragraph 3).

         •      graduated Retirement Benefit with Category B entitlement of a married
                woman is restricted to the rate in force at the later of the date of her
                entitlement to Category B Retirement Pension on her husband's contributions
                or the date by which both she and her husband had ceased to be ordinarily
                resident in Great Britain.

         Accordingly graduated Retirement Benefit may be restricted to the rate under a later
         uprating order than that which applies to the Category B Retirement Pension
         (paragraph 33).

         •      graduated Retirement Benefit with Category B entitlement of a widower or a
                widow who was entitled to a Category B Retirement Pension as a married
                woman is restricted to the later of the date of widowhood or the date of
                entitlement to Category B Retirement Pension on the deceased spouse's
                contributions or the date on which the surviving spouse ceased to be ordinarily
                resident in Great Britain.

         Accordingly where the appropriate date is the date of entitlement to Category B
         Retirement Pension on the deceased spouse's contributions and before that date,
         one or more uprating orders have come into effect since the date of widowhood,
         graduated Retirement Benefit will be restricted to the rate under a later up-rating
         order than that which applies to the Category B Retirement Pension (paragraph 45
         and 52). This will also be the case where immediately before age 60 a widow was in




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                           Annex 1

          receipt of Widow's Pension following the death of a husband who had retired or was
          entitled to Category A Retirement Pension (paragraph 43).

29        Where graduated Retirement Benefit has already been restricted with Category B as
          a married woman (paragraph 42 2.), it is restricted to the same date on widowhood.




          Inherited graduated Retirement Benefit

30        The surviving spouse is entitled to (“inherits”) ½ the graduated Retirement Benefit
                                                                                                  1
          that the late spouse was or would have been entitled to at the date of death .
                                              1 SS (graduated Retirement Benefit) (No 2) Regs, Sch 1, sec 37(1)


31        Where the surviving spouse becomes entitled to inherited graduated Retirement
          Benefit from a date later than the spouse's date of death the rate of graduated
          Retirement Benefit is ½ of

          1. the amount of graduated Retirement Benefit that the spouse was or would have
              been entitled to

          2. increased by any upratings between the date of death and the date of the
              survivor's entitlement to graduated Retirement Benefit.

32        Once awarded the inherited graduated Retirement Benefit is restricted to the rate in
          force at the date of entitlement (paragraph 27).




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                           Annex 1


          Category B Retirement Pension

          Married woman - before 1.10.89

33        Where a husband and wife are not ordinarily resident in Great Britain and were
          married before the date of his retirement or deemed retirement, the Category B
          Retirement Pension to be awarded to her is restricted to the rate in force at the later
          of

          •        the date on which her husband retired or was deemed retired or

          •        the date on which he ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                                                                                                     1
          •        the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                           1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(a) & (c)


34        The rate of Category B is still restricted to the dates set out in paragraph 33 where
          she is
                                                                   1
          •        also entitled to Category A Retirement Pension or
                                                                              2
          •        retires earlier on the same date or later than he does (but see paragraph 35).
                                                                                      1 reg 5(7); 2 reg 5(3) & (c)


35        Where paragraph 36 applies the rate of Category B Retirement Pension is restricted
          to the rate in force at the later of the date
                                                                       1
          •        she is entitled to Category B Retirement Pension or

          •        her husband ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or

          •        she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.
                                                                                  1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)


36        The rate of Category B is restricted as in paragraph 35 where a woman

          •        retired or was deemed retired before the date of her husband's retirement or
                   deemed retirement and

          •        claims too late to establish title to Category B Retirement Pension from the
                   date of his retirement or deemed retirement and

          •        is not entitled to Category A Retirement Pension from any date before her
                   Category B Retirement Pension entitled begins.




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                       Annex 1


          Married after his date of retirement

37        Where a husband and wife are not ordinarily resident in Great Britain and marry
          after the date of his retirement or deemed retirement, Category B Retirement
          Pension is restricted to the rate at the later of

          •      the date of their marriage or

          •      the date on which he ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                                                                                              1
          •      the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                                       1 reg 5(3)(a) & (c)


38        Where a woman

          •      retired or was deemed retired before the date of marriage and

          •      claims too late to establish title to Category B Retirement Pension from the
                 date of marriage and

          •      is not entitled to Category A Retirement Pension from any date before her
                 Category B Retirement Pension entitlement begins the Category B
                 Retirement Pension to be awarded to her is restricted to the rate prescribed at
                 the later of
                                                                                              1
          •      the date from which she is entitled to Category B Retirement Pension or

          •      the date on which her husband ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great
                 Britain or

          •      the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.
                                                                          1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)


          She is entitled to Category A before marriage

39        If both husband and wife are retired or deemed retired before the date of their
          marriage and she is entitled to Category A Retirement Pension, Category B is
          restricted to the rate set out at the later of

          •      if she retires or is deemed retired on an earlier date than his retirement or
                 deemed retirement, the date on which her husband retired or was deemed
                        1
                 retired or

          •      if her retirement or deemed retirement is on the same or a later date than his
                 retirement or deemed retirement, the date of her entitlement to Category A
                                                                                                   2
                 Retirement Pension (provided this is not later than the date of marriage) or

          •      the date on which he ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or

          •      the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.
                                                                         1 reg 5(3)(c) & (7); 2 reg 5(3)(c)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                   Annex 1


          Husband ordinarily resident in Great Britain

40        The rate of Category B is restricted to the rate in force at the date she becomes
          entitled where

          •     her husband is ordinarily resident in Great Britain and
                                                               1
          •     she is not ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                          1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                    Annex 1


          Category B Retirement Pension - widows/ widowers

          Introduction

41        The restriction on the rate of Category B paid to widows or widowers depends upon
          whether the person was

          •      widowed under pension age (paragraph 43)

          •      widowed over pension age (paragraph 45) or

          •      entitled to Retirement Pension before their spouse died (paragraph 47-48).


          Woman widowed under pension age

42        The rate of Category B is restricted to the same uprating as her Widow's Benefit
          where she was entitled (or treated as entitled) to Widow's Benefit immediately before
          age 60. The rate of Widow's Benefit is restricted to the earlier of

          •      the date her husband died
                                                                                     1
          •      the date he became entitled to Category A Retirement Pension or

          •      if she was ordinarily resident in Great Britain on the earlier of those dates, the
                 date she stopped being ordinarily resident in Great Britain.
                                                                           1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(d)


43        Once awarded the Category B Retirement Pension remains frozen whilst she
                                                    1
          continues to reside outside Great Britain .
                                                                           1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(b)


          Widowed over pension age

          Not entitled to Retirement Pension when spouse died

44        Except where paragraph 65 applies, where a man or woman, not previously entitled
          to Retirement Pension, is widowed over pension age the rate of Category B is
          restricted to the later of

          •      the date he or she was last ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                                            1
          •      the date their spouse died .
                                                                                             1 sec 5(3)(b)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                         Annex 1

45        Where the only reason that a woman is not entitled to Category B is because no
          claim has been made, the rate of Category B is restricted to the later of

          •      the date she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or

          •      the date to which her Category B Retirement Pension as a married woman
                 would have been restricted.


          Man entitled to Category A Retirement Pension from an
          earlier date

46        Where a man widowed after reaching pensionable age becomes entitled to a
          Category B Retirement Pension, the rate of Category B is restricted to that in force
          at

          •      if his wife retired or was deemed retired before the date of his entitlement to
                 Category A Retirement Pension, the date of his entitlement to Category A
                                       1
                 Retirement Pension or

          •      in any other case, the earlier of either his wife's retirement or deemed
                             2                         3
                 retirement or the date of widowhood or

          •      if later than the above dates the date on which he ceased to be ordinarily
                 resident in Great Britain.
                                                      1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c); 2 reg 5(7); 3 reg 5(3)(b)


          Woman already entitled to Category A or B Retirement
          Pension

47        Where a woman is widowed after pension age the restrictions on the rate of
          Category B Retirement Pension depends upon whether she was already entitled to

          •      personal Category A Retirement Pension (paragraph 49) or

          •      Category B Retirement Pension as a married woman (paragraph 50).

48        Where a widow was entitled to Category A Retirement Pension and she had not
          retired or been deemed retired, the rate of her Retirement Pension Category A is
          restricted to the later of

          •      the date her husband died or

          •      the date on which the claimant ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great
                        1
                 Britain .
                                                                                             1 reg5 (3)(b) &(7)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                  Annex 1


49        Where a woman was entitled to married woman's Category B Retirement Pension
          (paragraph 51) when her husband died, the rate of Category B is restricted to the
          later of

          •      the uprating that her married woman's Category B was restricted to or
                                                                                             1
          •      the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                    1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(b) & (7)


50        The restriction in paragraph 50 applies

          •      whether or not she was entitled to Category A Retirement Pension before her
                 husband died

          •      where she was entitled to Category B Retirement Pension but it was not being
                 paid because she was receiving Category A Retirement Pension and

          •      whether she was not entitled to Category B Retirement Pension but would
                 have been entitled had a claim been made.

51        Where a woman widowed after reaching pensionable age

          •      is entitled to Category B Retirement Pension from date before 1.10.89 and

          •      retired or was deemed retired before her husband retired or was deemed
                 retired and

          •      was not in receipt of a Category A Retirement Pension and

          •      fails to claim Category B Retirement Pension in time to secure entitlement for
                 any period before widowhood

          the Category B Retirement Pension to be awarded is restricted to the rate prescribed
          in the later of
                                        1
          •      the date of widowhood or

          •      the date on which she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.
                                                                                            1 reg 5(3)(b)


          Increments

          Category A Retirement Pension

52        Increments earned for deferred retirement are restricted to the rate in force at the
          later of

          •      the date of entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension or
                                                                              1
          •      the date on which ordinary residence in Great Britain ends .
                                                                        1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 51(3)(c)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                                 Annex 1


53        This applies to

          •      Category A Retirement Pension on own contributions alone

          •      Category A Retirement Pension substituting the contributions of a deceased
                                        1
                 or former spouse

          •      Composite Category A Retirement Pension entitlement as a widow or
                            2
                 widower .
                                1 SS (Widow's Benefit & Retirement Pension) Regs, reg 8; 2 SS CB Act 92, sec 52 & 53 (2)


          Change in Category A entitlement

54        A change in Category A entitlement, for example from personal Category A
          Retirement Pension to substituted Category A, does not affect entitlement to
          increments. Increments remains restricted to the later of the date

          •      entitlement to Category A first arise or

          •      ordinarily residence in Great Britain ended (paragraph 53).

          Increments on husband's insurance

55        Increments earned on the part of her composite Category A Retirement Pension
          based on her husband's insurance are not payable until he retires or is deemed
          retired. Those increments are still restricted to the later of the date that she

          •      became entitled to Category A Retirement Pension or

          •      ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain.

          Category B Retirement Pension - married women

56        A married woman who defers retirement earns increments to her Category B to the
          later of

          •      the date of her husband's retirement or deemed retirement or

          •      the date of her own retirement or deemed retirement.

57        The increments are restricted to the rate in force at the later of

          •      the date of her husband's retirement or deemed retirement or

          •      the date he ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                                                                                                1
          •      the date she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain . (See paragraph
                 59 for the exception to this rule).
                                                                                         1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(a)




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                    Annex 1


58        Where a woman

          •      retired or was deemed retired before the date of her husband's retirement or
                 deemed retirement and

          •      claims too late to establish title to Category A Retirement Pension from the
                 date of his retirement or deemed retirement and

          •      is not entitled to Category A Retirement Pension from any date before her
                 Category A Retirement Pension entitlement begins

          the increments are restricted to the date in force at the later of

          •      the date from which she is entitled to Category A Retirement Pension or

          •      the date her husband ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or
                                                                                   1
          •      the date she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .

          Category B Retirement Pension - woman's marriage ends after
          pension age

59        A woman whose marriage ends after pension age is still entitled to Category B
          increments earned during the period of the marriage (paragraph 66). These
          increments are payable with her Category A Retirement Pension and are restricted
          to the rate in force at the later of the date

          •      she ceases to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain or

          •      of the decree absolute or annulment or

          •      the date of her retirement or deemed retirement or

          •      the date of entitlement to Retirement Pension if a late claim is made and
                 Retirement Pension cannot be awarded from the date of retirement.

          Category B Retirement Pension - widow or widower

60        Category B increments earned by a widow or widower on the contributions of a
          deceased spouse are restricted to the rate in force at the later of

          •      the date of widowhood or
                                                                                          1
          •      the date he or she ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .
                                                                            1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(b)


61        Increments can only be earned by a widow if she

          •      for Widow's Benefit, gives up her Widow's Benefit entitlement or

          •      for Category B Retirement Pension, elects to be treated as not entitled to
                 Retirement Pension.




Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                              Annex 1

          Inherited increments - before 1.10.89

62        Where a surviving spouse is entitled to have his or her pension increased by the
          amount of the increments to which the deceased spouse was or would have been
                    1
          entitled the rate of increments he or she receives depends upon

          •     whether the deceased spouse had retired prior to his or her death and

          •     whether the inherited increments are added to a Category A or Category A
                Retirement Pension and

          •     whether the surviving spouse defers his or her retirement.
                                                                                      1 SS CB Act 92, Sch 5, para 4-6


63        If the deceased spouse had not retired at the date of death the widow or widower
          inherits the increments to which the deceased spouse would have been entitled had
                                                   1
          he or she retired on the date of death . As this entitlement would have been to the
                                                                                  2
          rate payable under the up-rating preceding the date of death this is the rate
          inheritable by the widow or widower at the date of widowhood.
                                                                1 Sch 5, para 4(1); 2 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)


64        If the deceased spouse had retired before the date of death the widow or widower
          inherits the increments to which the deceased spouse was entitled at the date of
                1
          death . If the deceased spouse was not ordinarily resident in Great Britain these will
          have been restricted to the rate payable under the uprating preceding the later of

          •     the date of retirement or

          •     the date of entitlement to Category A Retirement Pension or
                                                                              2
          •     the date ordinary residence in Great Britain ceased .

          This restricted amount is the rate inheritable by the widow or widower at the date of
          widowhood.
                                            1 SS CB Act 92, Sch 5, para 4(1) & (2); 2 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c)

65        In contrast to the usual rule, in the particular context of paragraphs 64 and 65
          retired does not include deemed retired. This is because the surviving spouse
          inherits either the increments to which the deceased spouse was entitled or those to
          which the deceased spouse would have been entitled if he or she had retired on the
                                                                                             1
          date of death. Where a person dies over deemed pensionable age having failed to
          claim, he or she was not entitled to Retirement Pension. The amount of that
          person's entitlement to increments if he or she had claimed from the date of death
          would have taken account of upratings falling between

          •     pensionable age and deemed retirement age

          •     deemed retirement age and date of entitlement (paragraph 1).

          Accordingly this is the amount inheritable by the surviving spouse. Paragraph 64
          applies to such a case therefore not paragraph 65.
                                                                                                 1 SS Act 75, sec 27(5)


Vol 2 First Issue
Retirement Pension frozen rates pre 1.10.89                                               Annex 1


66       Having inherited the increments to which the deceased spouse was entitled or would
         have been entitled had he or she retired, the surviving spouse may defer retirement.
         If so, the rate at which the inherited increments become payable when he or she
         subsequently retires or, if later, becomes entitled to Retirement Pension is either

         1.    if payable with Category A Retirement Pension, the rate inherited increased
               under the upratings between the date of widowhood and the date the surviving
                                                                             1
               spouse becomes entitled to Retirement Pension or

         2.    if payable with Category B Retirement Pension the rate inherited at the date of
               widowhood or if later, the rate which would have been payable on the date the
                                                                                                   2
               surviving spouse ceased to be ordinarily resident in Great Britain .

         This applies also to increments inherited by a woman widowed under pensionable
         age which become payable to her when she retires on reaching age 60.
                    1 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(c); SS Pens Act 75; Sch 2, para 4(3); 2 SS Ben (PA) Regs, reg 5(3)(b)




Vol 2 Amendment 6 February 2003
