                                                                                 Memo DMG 17/20


    RIGHT TO RESIDE – PERSONS OF NORTHERN IRELAND
    – FAMILY MEMBERS – IS, JSA, ESA & SPC


     Contents                                                                                 Paragraphs

     Introduction                                                                             1-4

     Background                                                                               5-7

     Definitions

       EEA national                                                                           8

       Family Member                                                                          9

       Relevant person of Northern Ireland                                                    10

     Persons of Northern Ireland who will be able to apply to the EUSS                        11 - 12

       DM Action                                                                              13

       Examples 1 - 3

       Verification of status                                                                 14

     Person from abroad / person not in Great Britain                                         15 - 17

     Summary                                                                                  18 - 23

     Annotations

     Contacts




    Introduction

1   Changes1 are being made to the Income Support (General) Regulations 1987,
    Jobseeker’s Allowance Regulations 1996, State Pension Credit Regulations 2002, and
    Employment and Support Allowance Regulations 2008, and come into force from
    24.8.20.

     1 Social Security (Persons of Northern Ireland – Family Members) (Amendment) Regulations 2020 (SI 2020 No. 683)
2   These amendments reflect that from 24.8.20, family members of a relevant person of
    Northern Ireland can now apply for leave to enter, or remain, in the UK under the EU
    Settlement Scheme (“EUSS”)1.

                                                                                    1 Immigration Rules, Appendix EU


3   The amendments add relevant definitions1 to the income related benefit regulations.

                          1 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(5); JSA Regs, reg 85A(5); ESA Regs, reg 70(5); SPC Regs, reg 2(5)


4   The amendments ensure that an eligible family member of a person of Northern
    Ireland can access IS, JSA, ESA or SPC in broadly the same terms as a family
    member of an Irish national from the Republic of Ireland or other EEA citizens, if they
    apply to and are granted leave under the EUSS. This is done by adding a family
    member of a person of Northern Ireland to the list of persons exempt1 from the
    habitual residence test, and is subject to the provision2 that the relevant person of
    Northern Ireland (on whom the family member is relying) has a qualifying right of
    residence e.g. as a worker or self-employed person.

    1 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3B); JSA Regs, reg 85A(3B); ESA Regs, reg 70(3B); SPC Regs, reg 2(3B); 2 IS (Gen) Regs,
                            reg 21AA(4)(zd); JSA Regs, reg 85A(4)(zd); ESA Regs, reg 70(4)(zd); SPC Regs, reg 2(4)(zd)


    Background

5   The Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement 1998 affords people of Northern Ireland the
    right to hold both British and Irish citizenship, and to identify as Irish or British or both.
    Irish nationals from the Republic of Ireland are currently able to bring family members
    to the UK under EU law provisions, while people of Northern Ireland are subject to the
    UK’s domestic legislation.

6   As part of the 'New Decade, New Approach' agreement to the Northern Ireland
    Executive, a commitment was included to change the rules governing how persons of
    Northern Ireland bring their family members to the UK. This commitment is being
    implemented via a change to the Home Office Immigration Rules under Appendix EU.
    From 24.8.20, family members of persons of Northern Ireland will be able to apply for
    leave under the EUSS on the same basis as EEA nationals. These changes apply to
    eligible family members of all relevant persons of Northern Ireland, regardless of how
    they identify, whether they hold British, Irish or dual British-Irish citizenship and
    whether they live in Northern Ireland or elsewhere within the UK.

7   These amendments to the income related regulations make changes that will mean
    eligible family members will be able to apply for EUSS leave and access benefits on
    broadly the same terms as the family members of Irish citizens from the Republic of
    Ireland do in the UK.
     Definitions

     EEA National

8    “EEA national” is defined by reference to the Imm (EEA) Regulations 20161 (see DMG
     073262).

     Note: “A relevant person of Northern Ireland” is added to the Home Office definition2
     of “EEA citizen”.

                                   1 Imm (EEA) Regs 2016, reg 2(1); 2. Immigration Rules, Appendix EU, Annex 1


     Family Member

9    “family member” is defined by reference to the Imm (EEA) Regulations 20161 (see
     DMG 072900).

     Note: the exception to the definition of being a family member, is that the criteria of
     the relevant person of Northern Ireland being an EEA national, does not apply for the
     purposes of paragraph (4)(zd) (i.e. the person of Northern Ireland is a qualifying
     person, or would be, but for fact they are not an EEA national). This exception to the
     definition of “family member” had to be included because of the provision2 within the
     definition which states that the person with a qualifying right to reside must be an EEA
     national unless specified legislation3 applied (i.e. family members and extended family
     members of British citizens). As persons of Northern Ireland are British citizens, it is
     necessary to ensure that that specified legislation3 is not applied to them. Otherwise
     their family members would never be able to access benefits because the person of
     Northern Ireland would be unable to demonstrate cross border movement.

                                              1 Imm (EEA) Regs 2016, reg 7(1)(a), (b) or (c); 2. reg 7(4); 3. reg 9


     Relevant person of Northern Ireland

10   “Relevant person of Northern Ireland” means1 a person who:

     1.    is

           1.1      a British citizen or

           1.2      an Irish citizen or

           1.3      a British citizen and an Irish citizen and

     2.    was born in Northern Ireland and, at the time of the person’s birth, at least one
           of their parents was
             2.1        a British citizen or

             2.2        an Irish citizen or

             2.3        a British citizen and an Irish citizen or

             2.4        otherwise entitled to reside in Northern Ireland without any restriction
                        on their period of residence

     1 Immigration Rules, Appendix EU, Annex 1; IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(5); JSA Regs, reg 85A(5); ESA Regs, reg 70(5);
                                          SPC Regs, reg 2(5); The Belfast Agreement (Good Friday Agreement), Annex 2.


     Persons of Northern Ireland who will be able to apply to the EUSS

11   From the 24.8.20, the Home Office is opening the EUSS1 to family members of
     persons of Northern Ireland. This immigration status will give those eligible access to
     benefits.

                                                                                    1 Immigration Rules, Appendix EU


12   Non-UK family members of persons of Northern Ireland will be able to apply to the
     EUSS if they have an established family relationship with the person of Northern
     Ireland and the person of Northern Ireland is resident in the UK before 31.12.20.
     Those eligible will have until 30.6.21 to apply for the EUSS.

     Note: An established family relationship is one that is recognised under EEA law1.

                                                                           1 Immigration Rules, Appendix EU, Annex 1


     DM Action

13   DMs will be required to establish

     1.      eligibility i.e. whether the family member of a relevant person of Northern
             Ireland has a qualifying right to reside which allows eligibility to claim the
             relevant benefit (on the same basis as family members of Irish citizens with
             limited leave to remain (pre-settled status) under the EUSS) and

     2.      entitlement i.e. whether the family member of a relevant person of Northern
             Ireland satisfies the conditions of entitlement for the relevant benefit and is
             entitled to receive the appropriate rate of that benefit e.g. as a family (couple
             rate and additional elements); the single rate only; or not entitled to claim at all.
Note: As a relevant person of Northern Ireland may identify as British, they have no
restrictions on their access to Benefits (but will still need to satisfy the entitlement
conditions of the relevant benefit being claimed).

EXAMPLES

Example 1 – family members with EUSS Limited Leave to Remain (pre-settled
status) and deriving a qualifying right to reside

Gaelan is a relevant person of Northern Ireland, who has been married to his Third
Country National (TCN) wife, Tracey, for 3 years. Tracey has 2 TCN children (Jon 16
and Judith 14). The family have lived in Ballymena for 3 years.

Gaelan has an Irish passport. Tracey, Jon and Judith were granted EUSS Limited
Leave to Remain (pre-settled status) on 1.9.20. Gaelan was made redundant after
working for 4 years and has made a claim to JSA on 7.9.20 for himself and his family.

As Gaelan is a relevant person of Northern Ireland who is a long term resident in the
CTA, who is exercising a qualifying right to reside (i.e. has retained his worker status
through redundancy), this means that his family members, Tracey, Jon and Judith,
can also derive rights from Gaelan.

Example 2 – Family members with EUSS Limited Leave to Remain (pre-settled
status) and deriving a qualifying right to reside

Kieran is 67 years old and is a relevant person of Northern Ireland, who is living with
TCN Katie (a 43 year-old) and her 2 TCN children (Joe 16 and Jane 13). They have
lived together for 2 years. Kieran retired on 1.9.20 and receives a state pension after
working for 49 years.

Kieran has a British passport. TCNs Katie, Joe and Jane are granted EUSS Limited
Leave to Remain (pre-settled status) on 24.9.20. On 28.9.20, Kieran makes a claim for
SPC for himself and his family. Although as a mixed-age couple, Kieran cannot claim
SPC and is advised to apply for UC.

As Kieran is a British citizen who is habitually resident in the CTA, he has immediate
eligibility to UC. As a relevant person of Northern Ireland who is exercising a qualifying
right to reside (i.e. Kieran retained his worker status after reaching retirement age),
this means his family members can also derive rights from Kieran.
     Example 3 – no relevant person of Northern Ireland household

     Euan is a British national, who is not a relevant person from Northern Ireland. He met
     and married Kathleen, an American national, whilst he was working in the US. They
     have 2 children (Jack 5 and Jody 3).

     The family return to the UK on 1.5.20. Euan has a British passport. Kathleen, Jack and
     Jody have been granted Home Office leave to enter the UK for 5 years with the
     condition of no recourse to public funds. Kathleen works part time as a receptionist.
     On 8.9.20, Euan makes a claim to JSA for himself and his family.

     Euan and Kathleen have established habitual residence in the CTA, and as a British
     citizen who is habitually resident in the CTA, Euan has immediate eligibility to JSA.
     However, as Euan is not a relevant person of Northern Ireland, his family members
     cannot derive any qualifying right to reside from Euan and their immigration status
     means they have no recourse to public funds.

     Euan has entitlement to the single rate of JSA. Kathleen is an ineligible partner and
     there is no entitlement for Jack and Jody. Even though Euan is an eligible claimant,
     the condition of no recourse to public funds denies eligibility to JSA for his family
     members. As Kathleen is part of the household, her earnings are taken into account.

     Verification of status

14   Where TCNs self-identify as a family member of a relevant person of Northern Ireland
     during the claim process, DMs will need to verify their EUSS status. Claimants should
     be able to verify their EUSS leave on gov.uk, via a share code. A screen should be
     produced which will confirm identity, type of status (Indefinite Leave to Remain or
     Limited Leave to Remain) and the date of issue. For those granted indefinite leave to
     remain (settled status), they are treated in the same way as a UK national. For those
     granted limited leave to remain (pre-settled status), information will need to be
     obtained from the Home Office to confirm that limited leave to remain has been
     granted on the basis of the TCN being a family member of a person of Northern
     Ireland. The DM can establish this information through the Home Office, using the
     existing Evidence and Enquiry stencil.


     Person from abroad / person not in Great Britain

15   Specified legislation1 provides that a claimant is ineligible for benefits where they are a
     “person from abroad”, or a “person not in Great Britain”, for the purposes of SPC. A
     person is a person from abroad / a person not in Great Britain, if he or she is not
     habitually resident in the CTA2 (UK, the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man or the
     Republic of Ireland). No person shall be treated as habitually resident without a
     relevant right to reside in the place where he or she is habitually resident3. However,
     certain categories of people are exempt from this habitual residence test4.

          1 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA; JSA Regs, reg 85A; ESA Regs, reg 70; SPC Regs, reg 2; 2 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(1);
     JSA Regs, reg 85A(1); ESA Regs, reg 70(1); SPC Regs, reg 2(1); 3 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(2); JSA Regs, reg 85A(2);
          ESA Regs, reg 70(2); SPC Regs, reg 2(2); 4 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3B) & (4); JSA Regs, reg 85A(3B) & (4); ESA
                                                                       Regs, reg 70(3B) & (4); SPC Regs, reg 2(3B) & (4)


16   These amendments create an exception1 that where a family member of a relevant
     person of Northern Ireland has been granted limited leave to remain (pre-settled
     status) under the EUSS, that leave is relevant for the purposes of establishing habitual
     residence. This is subject to the provision that if the relevant person of Northern
     Ireland were an EEA national, the family member would have a right to reside not
     otherwise excluded by the income related benefits regulations.

                       1 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3B); JSA Regs, reg 85A(3B); ESA Regs, reg 70(3B); SPC Regs, reg 2(3B);


17   The amendments provide that subject to certain conditions, a family member of a
     relevant person of Northern Ireland who has been granted limited leave to remain
     (pre-settled status) under the EUSS, will not be considered as being a person from
     abroad, a person not in Great Britain or a person to be treated as not being in Great
     Britain (as the case may be), thereby adding them to the list of persons exempt from
     the habitual residence test. The relevant conditions1 are that, at the point the family
     member makes a claim,

     1.        the relevant person of Northern Ireland would be considered a qualified person,
               as

               1.1        a worker2 or

               1.2        a self-employed person3 or

               1.3        a self-sufficient person4 or

               1.4        student5 or

               1.5        a person who has acquired a permanent right of residence6 or

     2.        the family member has retained a right of residence7.

     Alternatively, where the family member would have a right to reside under the Imm
     (EEA) Regulations 2016 because of their relationship with a person of Northern
     Ireland, they will have access to income related benefits as long as that right to reside
     is not excluded by the relevant regulations8. The relevant person of Northern Ireland
     would be treated as if they were an EEA national (as defined in the EEA
     Regulations9).

           1 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(4)(zd); JSA Regs, reg 85A(4)(zd); ESA Regs, reg 70(4)(zd); SPC Regs, reg 2(4)(zd);
                   2 Imm (EEA) Regs 2016, reg 6(1)(b); 3 reg 6(1)(c); 4 reg 6(1)(d); 5 Reg 6(1)(e); 6 Reg 15; 7 Reg 10;
     8 IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3) & (3A); JSA Regs, reg 85A(3) & (3A); ESA Regs, reg 70(3) & (3A); SPC Regs, reg 2(3)
                                                                              & (3A); 9 Imm (EEA) Regs 2016, reg 2(1)


     Summary

18   A family member of a "relevant person of Northern Ireland” is added to the list of
     persons exempt from the habitual residence test. This is provided that the person of
     Northern Ireland on whom the family member is relying would

     1.     be deemed to be a worker or self-employed person, but for the fact that they are
            not an EEA national or

     2.     have a right to reside under the Imm (EEA) Regs 2016 if the person of Northern
            Ireland was an EEA national.

19   Family members of persons of Northern Ireland will have the same rights to access
     benefits on broadly the same terms as the family members of EEA nationals. Those
     eligible will either be granted Indefinite leave to remain (settled status) or limited leave
     to remain (pre-settled status) under the EUSS.

20   Those granted indefinite leave to remain will have the same access to benefits as a
     UK national does currently.

21   Those granted limited leave to remain (pre-settled status) will have the same access
     to benefits as the family members of Irish citizens. They will be able to access benefits
     where they are deriving a right from their person of Northern Ireland family member
     who is currently exercising a qualifying right to reside e.g. worker status. The holder
     can then apply for Indefinite Leave to Remain (settled status) after they have
     completed 5 years of residence.

22   Family members of persons of Northern Ireland without EUSS leave are not being
     granted access to income-related benefits under the proposed amendments.

23   No changes are being made to the status of a relevant person of Northern Ireland.
     They do not need to be included in the exemption list because they already have
     access to income-related benefits by virtue of their nationality, provided they meet the
     other eligibility requirements.
ANNOTATIONS

Please annotate the number of this memo (DMG 17/20) against DMG paragraphs:

072900 (Heading); 073262 (Heading)



CONTACTS

If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and
Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E19, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such
referrals should be followed, as set out in Memo DMG 04/19 - Obtaining legal advice
and guidance on the Law.



                                                               DMA Leeds: August 2020




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative
purposes only
