09-25: Date from which State Pension is Claimed - Effect of Upper
Tribunal Decision

Contents                     Paragraphs

Introduction                 1

Background                   2

UT’s decision                3

Applying the UT’s            4-6
decision

Annotations




Introduction

   1. This memo gives guidance on the decision of the UT in Secretary of State for Work and
     Pensions v DS [2025] UKUT 158 (AAC).




Background

   2. The claimant reached State Pension (SP) pensionable age on 20.8.21. He made an
     electronic claim for SP on 17.8.22, stating on the online form that the date from which he
     wished to receive benefit was 20.8.22. The DM awarded SP from that date. In October
     2022 the claimant then realized that he had made a mistake and asked for his benefit to
     start on 20.8.21 instead. The DM refused the request. On appeal, however, the FtT held
     that the period of the claim could be changed in the way the claimant wanted. The
     Secretary of State appealed to the UT.




UT’s Decision

   3. The UT upheld the Secretary of State’s appeal, finding that:
           1. the period of a SP claim is
                 1. determined by what the claimant asks for when claiming, the identification
                    of the date from which a claimant wishes their entitlement to State Pension
                     to begin is a ‘constitutive’ element of the claim and
                  2. cannot be changed after the claim has been decided and
          2. the DM
                  1. is not required to question a claimant’s clear and unambiguous statement
                     as to the date from which they wish to claim and
                  2. cannot properly be criticised for deciding an unambiguous claim quickly.




Applying the UT’s Decision

Claims

   4. The DM should find, without further investigation, that the period covered by a SP claim
     starts on the date the claimant specifies when claiming unless the claimant’s response to
     the relevant question asked by the claim form or process is:
          1. incomplete (e.g. just gives a year) or
          2. incoherent or obscure (e.g. the answer is not a date under the Gregorian calendar)
             or
          3. obviously mistaken (e.g. the date is long before retirement age or far in advance of
             the current date) or
          4. contradicted by an additional statement submitted with the claim 1.


                                                                                  1 R(SB) 18/85 & R(SB) 2/91


   5. However, if the claimant asks for the date on which their claim starts to be changed
     before the claim is decided, the DM should accept that the period of the claim has been

     amended1. As a decision on a claim does not take legal effect until it is notified 2, such an
     amendment can be made at any point prior to the notification of a decision on the claim
     being sent. If a request for an amendment is made but not acted on before a decision on
     the claim is notified, the DM should revise the decision on the ground of official error
     (DMG 03256).

   1 SS (C&P) Regs, reg 5(1); 2 R (Anufrijeva) v Secretary of State for the Home Department and another [2003]
                                                                                                     UKHL 36


Mandatory reconsideration

   6. If a claimant asks for the period of a claim to be changed after a decision on the claim
     has been notified, the DM should treat this as request for MR. The request should be
     refused unless, when deciding the claim, the DM:
          1. misunderstood what the claimant said, when claiming, about the date from which
            they wished to claim or
          2. failed to clarify an answer that was incomplete, incoherent, obscure, obviously
            mistaken or contradicted by an additional statement submitted with the claim.

                                                                           1 R(SB) 18/85 & R(SB) 2/91




Annotations

Please annotate the number of this memo against the following DMG paragraphs: 02420 and
74501 (heading).



Contacts

If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and Appeals (DMA)
Leeds, 3E zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such referrals should be
followed, as set out in – Memo 4/19 Requesting case guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.

                                                DMA (Leeds): August 2025




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative
  purposes only
