06-24 Competing Competency & the AH Judgment Revised
Competing Competency & THE AH JUDGMENT


Contents            Paragraphs


Introduction        1-2


The CoA judgment


      Background 3-9


      Affected      10-14
      claims


      Reverse       15-19
      Scenarios


Action for DMs      20-22


Annotations


Contacts


Introduction


    1. The purpose of this memo is to

           1. inform DMs about a recent Court of Appeal (CoA) judgment 1 which deals with how to
               determine competency for a child or economically inactive adult where they have a parent
               or family member economically active in a separate Member State (MS).
           2. inform DMs how to view the ‘reverse scenario’ where the child or economically inactive
               claimant is resident in, and has exported their benefit to, another MS and their family
               member is economically active in the UK.
           3. instruct DMs how to proceed with affected cases, and
           4. instruct DMs how the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) should be advised in dealing with lookalike
               cases where a DM’s decision has already been made and an appeal is received.


                                                                       1 AH v SSWP [2023] EWCA Civ 433


    2. The CoA judgment clarifies how the different articles of Regulation (EC) 883/2004 (Reg 883)
      apply when an economically inactive claimant is resident in the UK and their family member is
      economically active in an EU MS. The CoA judgment was handed down on 21 April 2023 and it will
      affect cases from this date.


THE CoA judgment


Background


   3. The claimant, AH, is an Austrian born, British national child who came to the UK in August 2012
      with her mother, father and sibling. Her mother, acting as her appointee, made a claim to DLA
      Child on 30 October 2013. An award of the care component was made on 29 January 2014.
   4. However, it was then discovered that the claimant’s father had separated from the household and
      moved to Belgium for work in September 2012. The claimant’s mother was not working in the UK,
      being a carer for the claimant and her sibling. Consequently, the decision of 29 January 2014 was
      revised on 19 May 2015 to disallow the award of the care component of DLA Child, on the basis
      that Belgium was competent for payments of cash sickness benefits to the father and his family,
      due to his status as a worker in Belgium.
   5. This decision was upheld at the Mandatory Reconsideration stage but was then revised by a FtT
      who allowed the appeal, because they determined there was a difference of opinion on
      competency between the UK and Belgium within the meaning of Article 6 of Regulation (EC)
      987/2009 (Reg 987). This article states that the MS of residence will make interim payments of
      cash sickness benefits to the claimant until the difference of opinion is settled.
   6. DWP appealed to the UT, and the UT allowed the appeal finding that;
          1. There was no difference of opinion between the UK and Belgium on the issue of
              competency, allowing the UT to set aside the decision of the FtT,
          2. The father fell under article 11(3)(a) of Reg 883, and the claimant and her mother fell under
              article 11(3)(e),
          3. That in such a scenario Article 21 took priority over any entitlement under UK legislation,
              making Belgium the competent state for the payment of cash sickness benefits.
   7. The claimant was granted permission to appeal to the CoA. The Secretary of State (SoS)
      accepted prior to the hearing that there was a difference of opinion between the UK and Belgium
      on the issue of competency, therefore, pursuant to Article 6 of Reg 987 the matter was referred
      to the Administrative Commission, and the CoA hearing was stayed pending the consideration of
      the matter. In the meantime, the SoS commenced interim payments of the care component DLA
      Child, as per Article 6.
   8. The Administrative Commission did not definitively decide the question of which legislation was
      applicable and took priority in the present case and the matter was returned to the UK courts.
   9. The CoA hearing was held in February 2023, with the decision being handed down on 21 April
      2023. The CoA decided that Article 21 did not displace the default position established by Article
      11(3)(e) for determining the state of applicable legislation and, accordingly, competence.
   10.It clarified that when Article 11(3)(e) applies to a person, Article 21 steps in if that person has no
      entitlement to benefits under the legislation of their state of residence (being the competent
      state under Article 11(3)(e)) and that the effect of Article 21 is then that the person in question
       would be entitled to benefits under the legislation of the state where their family member works
       or is self-employed. In effect, the CoA held that Article 21 was a ‘safety net’ provision, not one
       which determined competence and so it was not engaged in the claimant’s case.


Affected claims


    11. The CoA judgment concerns the following cohort and claimants must satisfy the below
       conditions:


     11.1 Be in the UK


     11.2 Be claiming Attendance Allowance, Carer’s Allowance, Disability Living Allowance (Care
          Component) or Personal Independence Payment (Daily Living Component)


     11.3 Be economically inactive (an adult who is not employed or self-employed or a child)


     11.4 Have a family member who is economically active in an EU member state (MS) or Iceland,
          Norway, Liechtenstein or Switzerland (spouse or parent)


     11.5 Is covered by Reg 883 via the EU Withdrawal Agreement (EUWA), the EEA EFTA Separation
          Agreement or the Swiss Citizen’s Rights Agreement.


    12.In circumstances where the Court of Appeal’s judgment applies, the UK is competent for the
       claimant’s cash sickness benefits pursuant to Article 11(3)(e) of Reg 883. The judgment does not
       apply to circumstances prior to 21 April 2023.


Example 1


Alex was a child in receipt of DLA Child (Care Component). In 2019, his mother, Rachel, accepted a job in
France and notified the department straight away. Alex remained in the UK with his father, David, who is
his carer, and is otherwise economically inactive. Rachel’s work brought the family into scope of the EU
regulations from the date of change. Under the pre-AH policies that were in place, Rachel’s work and
contributions to the French social security system meant that France was the competent state for the
payment of Cash Sickness Benefits to her immediate family. Alex’s award of DLA Child was superseded
and his entitlement to it ended. The AH Judgment does not work to reverse this decision as it was made
before the date of the relevant determination – 21 April 2023.


However, the situation may be different if the relevant change of circumstances was not notified
immediately. What would happen if the department was notified of Rachel’s move and commencement
of employment on 10 July 2023?


The family are still covered by the EUWA as Rachel was a UK citizen working in an EU MS prior to the end
of the Transition Period (TP) and has remained continuously so, since. However, the decision maker must
perform a closed period supersession and apply the pre-AH policies for the period from commencement
of employment until 20 April 2023 (the day before the AH judgment was handed down) and then apply

the AH principles from the 21 April 2023 onwards. These are that, even though his immediate family
member is working, Article 11(3)(e) of Reg 883 applies to Alex, which states that where a person is
economically inactive the legislation of the MS of residence applies to them. Therefore, the UK is
competent for payments of cash sickness benefits to him from 21 April 2023.


Example 2


Beverley is in receipt of Carer’s Allowance from 2018 as she is the carer for one of her parents. She is
otherwise economically inactive. In May 2023 her husband, John, a Dutch National who holds Settled
Status under the EU Settlement Scheme, accepts a job offer in Germany while Beverley remained in the
UK. John is covered by Article 10 of the EUWA as he was an EU Citizen in the UK at the end of the
Transition Period, so he and Beverley are within scope of the EU Regulations via Article 30(3) of the
EUWA. As Beverley is still resident in the UK and remains economically inactive, Article 11(3)(e) of Reg
883 applies to her, and the UK, as the MS of residence, is competent for payments of cash sickness
benefits to her. John will fall out of scope of the EUWA after five years absence from the UK and at such
time competency rules will no longer be a consideration.


    13.The Court of Appeal’s judgment concerns the application of Reg 883 and so will now only be
       relevant for those who fall under the EUWA (plus the Swiss Citizen’s Rights Agreement and EEA-
       EFTA Separation Agreement).
    14.Cases falling under the TCA, the UK/Switzerland Convention on Social Security or the Convention
       on Social Security between Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and the UK, are not affected by this
       judgment due to the benefits listed at 11.2 not being in scope of those agreements.
    15.It should be noted that cases where the claimant’s family member is economically inactive, but in
       receipt of an old age pension from another MS, are not affected by this judgment. This is because
       those in receipt of a pension are also covered by Articles 24, 25 and 29 of Reg 883, which
       displace the default position of Article 11(3)(e).


Example


Lena, a Polish national, is in receipt of Carers Allowance. She and her husband, Jan (also a Polish national)
have been living in the UK since 2016 and are covered by the EUWA. In November 2022 Jan becomes
eligible to claim his State Pension from Poland. Article 29 of Reg 883 is applicable to both Jan and Lena,
and the UK is no longer competent for the payment of cash sickness benefits to Lena. This does not
change after 21 April 2023.


Reverse Scenarios: Export Cases


    16.DMs may encounter scenarios where the claimant has exported their benefit to another MS, are
       economically inactive in that state, and their family member is economically active in the UK.
       Export of cash sickness benefits under Reg 883 are made by virtue Article 7.
    17.Article 7 allows for acquired rights to continue to be paid when the only change to a claimant’s

       circumstances is the MS of residence. The reasoning in Tolley1 was that benefits claimed in the

       UK are treated like acquired rights. The judgment of KR2 confirms the SoS view that Article 7
       permits the export of cash sickness benefits where the claimant becomes habitually resident in
       an EU MS.


                                            1 Tolley Judgement (C-430/15) 2 KR v SSWP [2019] AACR 22


    18.In the case of SSWP v MC1, which fell under Regulation (EC) 1408/1971, the UT decided that when
       a claimant commenced work then the competent institution changed, even in the case of export.
       The SoS agreed that this would also be the case under Reg 883 and where the family member of
       an economically inactive claimant who was exporting benefit commenced work under either
       regulation.


                                                                     1 SSWP v MC [2019] UKUT 84 (AAC)


    19.However, that view has now been revised and the judgment in MC only applies when it is the
       exporting claimant who commences employment in another MS.


Example


Michael, who was in receipt of DLA Child (Care Component) moved with his mother, Maria, to Spain in
2019. His mother was his carer and was economically inactive both before and after the move. Michael’s
father, Gabriel, remained resident in the UK, where he was working. Michael was covered by the EU
regulations and can export his award of DLA Child under Article 7 of Reg 883. In May 2023, Maria
commenced work in Spain. However, this did not disrupt Michael’s individual rights under Article 11(3)(e)
and his export of benefit under Article 7 was not altered. Under the EUWA this payment can continue
post-TP for as long as Michael remains in scope.


    20.In conclusion, the AH Judgment also applies to export cases covered by the EUWA, where:


     20.1 a claimant received a cash sickness benefit from their MS of residence either because
           Article11(3)(e) of Reg EU 883 applies as they are exercising an EU treaty right, or because
           domestic legislation applied to them as a national of that MS,


     20.2 they moved to another MS along with a family member or parent, and Article 7 allowed them
           to export the cash sickness benefit, and


     20.3 that family member or parent then takes up work.


     Post AH, the competent state does not change to the MS where a family member or parent is
     economically active if that differs from the claimant’s current competent state. Much like in a
     domestic situation as per the judgment, the parent or family member taking up work has no impact
     on the competent state for the claimant due to the CoA decision that Article 21 does not displace
     the default under Article 11(3)(e).


Action for DMs


    21.Where cases have had decision making stayed, pending the outcome of the CoA case those
       cases can now be processed in line with the judgment.
    22.DMs should cease to follow the priority list that is contained within DMG Memo 16/20.
    23.Where DMs are unsure as to whether a case is covered by the AH Judgment, they should contact
       DMA Leeds for guidance.


Annotations


The number of this memo should be annotated against the following DMG Chapters;


071753, 071761, 071779, 071785, 071790, Appendix 3 to Chapter 7, Part 2


Contacts


If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E
zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such referrals should be followed, as set out in –
Memo 4/19 Requesting case guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.




                                                                                   DMA Leeds: July 2024




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
  only
