                                                           Memo DMG 30/20


RIGHT TO RESIDE – EUROPEAN UNION (WITHDRAWAL
AGREEMENT) ACT 2020 – IS, JSA, ESA & SPC


Contents                                                          Paragraphs

Introduction                                                      1-2

The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 - Retained EU law        3–7

Implementation Period/ Transition Period                          8-9

Interaction with the EUWA 2018 and secondary legislation          10 - 13

Rights related to residence, Application Deadline and Temporary
Protection                                                        14 - 15

EU Settlement Scheme                                              16

   Grace Period                                                   17

Citizen’s Rights                                                  18 - 20

Personal Scope of the Withdrawal Agreement                        21 - 22
                                                                  23 - 24
   EU Citizens
                                                                  25
   UK Nationals
                                                                  26 - 29
   Frontier Workers
                                                                  30 – 32
   Family Members
                                                                  33
   Core Family Members
                                                                  34
   Extended Family members
                                                                  35 - 36
   Durable Partners
                                                                  37
   Future children
                                                                  38 - 40
   Third Country Family Members Accompanying EU Citizens
                                                                  41
   Dual Nationals – EU citizens
                                                                  42
   Dual Nationals – UK nationals
                                                                  43
   Dual nationals outside the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement
                                                                  44
   Continuity of residence
        Accumulation of periods                                                45

     Outside the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement

        Posted workers                                                         46

        Host State - Zambrano & Surinder Singh cases                           47 - 49

     Future immigration system                                                 50 - 52

     The Common Travel Area and the associated rights of Irish
     citizens in the UK
                                                                               53 – 55
     Summary
                                                                               56 - 59
     Annotations

     Contacts


    Introduction

1   This Memo provides guidance on the European Union (Withdrawal Agreement) Act
    2020 (“the WAA 2020”), which implements the Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed
    between the UK and the European Union (EU). The WAA 2020 is required to
    implement the Withdrawal Agreement for it to have domestic legal effect and to enable
    the UK Government to ratify the Withdrawal Agreement. This Act1 also gives effect to
    the EEA EFTA Separation Agreement between the UK and Norway, Iceland and
    Liechtenstein, and the Swiss Citizens’ Rights Agreement between the UK and
    Switzerland.

                                                                                    1. WAA 2020, s.6


2   The WAA 2020 provides for the direct application of the Withdrawal Agreement
    provisions in domestic law (where relevant) and amends the EU (Withdrawal) Act
    2018 (“the EUWA 2018”) to ensure it reflects the terms of the Withdrawal Agreement.
    The WAA 2020 also amends the EUWA 2018 so that certain EUWA 2018 provisions
    will take effect at the end of the transition period, instead of on exit day, such as the
    creation of the new body of retained EU law. The WAA 2020 also creates powers to
    make secondary legislation, where appropriate, to enable the Withdrawal Agreement
    to be implemented domestically. It includes amendments to the Northern Ireland Act
    1998 in relation to rights, safeguards and equality of opportunity protections contained
    in the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement 1998.


    The European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 - Retained EU law

3   The EUWA 2018 introduces a new body of domestic law, called “retained EU law”.
    This only takes effect after the end of the transition period. On exit day, the EUWA
    2018 repealed the European Communities Act 1972 (“the ECA 1972”) and the WAA
    2020 added new sections that save and modify the ECA 1972 and the UK legislation
    that implemented EU requirements, and gives effect to the Withdrawal Agreement
    terms on transition.

4   The ECA 1972 was the main legislation which gave effect to EU law in the UK and
    was the legislation which made EU law supreme over UK law. The amended EUWA
    20181 repealed the ECA on the day the UK left the EU, and provided that existing
    domestic legislation which implements EU law obligations (“EU-derived domestic
    legislation”) remains on the domestic statute book after the UK leaves the EU. EU-
    derived domestic legislation remains in place and continues to have effect on and after
    exit day, as it had effect before exit day2. The WAA 2020 preserves existing UK law
    that implements EU law, to ensure continuity of law until Parliament changes it.

                                                                      1. EUWA 2018, s.1A; 2. s.2(1)


5   This means that the rules on a person’s right to reside will continue to have effect in
    the UK, until free movement is repealed. This is scheduled to happen on 31.12.20 at
    11:00 p.m. The amended EUWA 2018 also creates temporary powers to make
    secondary legislation to enable corrections and consequential modifications to be
    made to laws that would otherwise no longer operate correctly once the UK has left
    the EU. The WAA 2020 and the amended EUWA 2018 also provide for the
    implementation, into UK law, of specific provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement
    where additional detail or clarification is required, and include a range of powers that
    leave much of this detail to Statutory Instruments.

6   The WAA 2020 sets out how retained EU law is to be read and interpreted on and
    after exit day, and sets out the relationship between the CJEU and domestic courts
    and tribunals after exit.

7   Retained EU law falls into three main categories

    1.     EU-derived domestic legislation1 (e.g. any domestic legislation that is related to
           the EU or EEA) and

    2.     direct EU legislation2 (e.g. EU Treaties, EU Regulations, EU Decisions & EU
           tertiary legislation) and

    3.     indirect EU legislation (EU Directives).

                                                                      1. EUWA 2018, s.2(2); 2 s.3(2)
     Implementation Period / transition period

8    The UK and the EU have agreed that the UK’s exit will be followed by a time-limited
     implementation period, which will last until 11.00 p.m. on 31.12.20. During the
     Implementation period, common rules will remain in place, with EU law continuing to
     apply to the UK in the same way it did prior to the UK’s departure as agreed within the
     Withdrawal Agreement.

     Note: The implementation period is also referred to as the “transition period”, and for
     consistency throughout this document, “transition period” has been used.

9    Therefore, new pieces of directly applicable EU law that are introduced during the
     transition period will continue to apply automatically within the UK1, in line with Part 4
     of the Withdrawal Agreement. Other new EU measures introduced will need to
     continue to be implemented domestically to comply with Part 4 of the Withdrawal
     Agreement.

                                                                                      1. EUWAA 2020, s.5


     Interaction with the EUWA 2018 and secondary legislation

10   In line with paragraphs 3 to 9 above, EU rules and regulations will continue to apply in
     the UK during the transition period. The WAA 2020 amends the EUWA 2018 so that
     the conversion of EU law into ‘retained EU law’ and precedence of the Court of Justice
     of the European Union (CJEU) can occur at the end of the transition period rather than
     on ‘exit day’. The WAA 20201 defines this point in time as “IP completion day”. The
     Withdrawal Agreement2 requires provisions referring to EU law concepts or provisions,
     to be implemented and applied in conformity, with relevant CJEU case law handed
     down before the end of the transition period. The WAA 2020 provides for how the UK
     courts should interpret EU case law and when they would not be bound by CJEU case
     law.

                                                      1. WAA 2020, S.39; 2. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.4(4)


11   The WAA 2020 also includes a power to allow Ministers, following consultation with
     the judiciary, to change how the EUWA 2018 provides for courts to interpret saved
     historic CJEU case law after the transition period. Regulations may enable the
     judiciary to decide whether to depart from any retained EU case law.

12   The WAA 2020 also amends the deficiency- correcting powers in the EUWA 2018 to
     allow correction of deficiencies arising both from the UK leaving the EU and the end of
     the transition period. Deficiencies could arise where:
     1.    the law does not function appropriately or sensibly because of the UK’s exit
           from the EU and the end of the transition period, for example, where a piece of
           legislation references an obligation ‘under EU law’, which no longer applies at
           the end of the transition period or

     2.    reciprocal arrangements which, as a result of Part 4 of the Withdrawal
           Agreement, no longer apply to the UK at the end of the transition period. For
           instance, during the transition period, the UK will need to continue to report to
           the European Commission on many issues. On ‘IP completion day’, the
           reference to the European Commission could be removed or replaced with
           reference to a domestic UK body or replacement UK domestic regime.

13   Direct jurisdiction of the CJEU in the UK will come to an end with the transition period.
     During the transition period, the UK and the EU have agreed that the existing EU
     mechanisms for supervision and enforcement will continue to apply in the UK. This will
     ensure that EU rules are interpreted and applied consistently in both the UK and the
     EU for the duration of the transition period1. The WAA 2020 amends the EUWA 2018
     to add provisions which end the jurisdiction of the CJEU in the UK and will take effect
     at the end of the transition period. However, where a case commences within 8 years
     from the end of the transition period, before a UK court or tribunal, and question arises
     concerning the interpretation of Part Two (Citizens’ Rights) of the Withdrawal
     Agreement, and that court or tribunal considers that a decision on that question is
     necessary to enable it to give judgment in that case, that court or tribunal may request
     the CJEU to give a preliminary ruling on that question2.

                                                    1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.86; 2. Art. 158(1)


     Rights related to residence, application deadline and temporary
     protection

14   The WAA 20201 provides a power to make regulations, which enables the UK to
     require individuals within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement or within scope of
     residence scheme immigration rules to apply for a UK immigration status (i.e. leave to
     enter or remain in the UK) conferring their residence rights under the Withdrawal
     Agreement, the EEA EFTA Separation Agreement, and the Swiss Citizens’ Rights
     Agreement (“the Agreements”), by a specified deadline. It also enables regulations to
     be made that ensure that those individuals within the scope of the Withdrawal
     Agreement continue to enjoy the residence rights in the UK pending conferral of their
     new immigration status. The UK is giving effect to its commitments in the Agreements
     regarding residence status for EU citizens, EEA EFTA and Swiss nationals and their
     family members through the EU Settlement Scheme (EUSS), which was established
     under Immigration Rules made under section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.
                                                                                   1. EUWAA 2020, s.7


15   Free movement rights for EU citizens are set out in the EU Treaties and the
     Citizenship Directive 2004/38/EC and implemented domestically through the
     Immigration Act 1988 and the Imm (EEA) Regulations 2016. By ending free
     movement, EU citizens, EEA EFTA nationals, and Swiss nationals will become subject
     to immigration control. Free movement will end on 31.12.20. There will then be a
     Grace Period (see paragraph 17 below) and those who were exercising treaty rights
     before the end of the transition period will have until 30.6.21 to apply for status1.

     Note: Other cohorts who are not covered by the Withdrawal Agreement, the EEA
     EFTA Separation Agreement and the Swiss Citizens’ Rights Agreement may make an
     application to the EUSS e.g. Irish citizens enjoy a right to reside in the UK that is not
     reliant on the UK’s membership of the EU. This means that Irish nationals do not need
     to apply for status under the EUSS. However, Irish nationals may make an application
     under the EUSS if they wish to do so.

                                                                        1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.18


     EU Settlement Scheme

16   In addition to the WAA 2020, the Immigration Rules (made under the Immigration Act
     1971) deliver the EU Settlement Scheme (“the EUSS”). The WAA 2020 makes
     reference to ‘Residence Scheme Immigration Rules’ which provide for all EU citizens,
     EEA EFTA and Swiss nationals, and their family members, resident in the UK to be
     eligible to apply for leave under the EUSS. This includes citizens who do not have a
     right to reside under the Free Movement Directive at the end of the transition period,
     or who currently derive an EU right of residence by virtue of their relationship to a UK
     national, and therefore fall outside the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Grace Period

17   The grace period runs from 1.1.21 to 30.6.21. Eligible EU citizens will have until
     30.6.21 to submit their application for EUSS leave. EU citizens will be able to rely on
     their rights under the Withdrawal Agreement, if their application is submitted before
     the end of the grace period and until their application is decided. If their application is
     refused, and an appeal is made, they will be able to rely on their rights under the
     Withdrawal Agreement until the appeal is withdrawn or is finally determined1 (see note
     2 below).

     Note 1: Anyone who submits their EUSS application after the end of the grace period,
     becomes an unlawful resident in the UK until that application is decided.
     Note 2: “Finally determined” includes an application being successful or exhausting
     any rights of appeal that the individual may have1.

     Note 3: Separate guidance is being drafted in relation to the Grace Period.

           1. The Citizens’ Rights (Application Deadline and Temporary Protection) (EU Exit) Regulations 2020, reg 4(7)


     Citizens’ Rights

18   The WAA 2020 gives effect to the Withdrawal Agreement so that it applies directly in
     the UK, underpinning the rights contained within Part Two (Titles I, II and III) of the
     Withdrawal Agreement in domestic law and providing a means of redress where

     1.    these rights are not properly implemented or

     2.    where other legislation is inconsistent with the Withdrawal Agreement.

     It also makes provision for the corresponding EEA EFTA Separation Agreement and
     Swiss Citizens’ Rights Agreement. In addition, the WAA 2020 establishes an
     independent body to monitor the implementation and application of the citizens’ rights
     part of the Withdrawal Agreement and the EEA EFTA Separation Agreement in the
     UK.

19   The WAA 20201 makes provision for Union citizens’ rights by legislating for:

     1.    rights in relation to entry and residence, including:

           1.1      residence rights of family members,

           1.2      deadlines for applications and temporary protection2;

           1.3      rights of frontier workers3;

           1.4      restrictions on rights of entry and residence4, and retention of existing
                    grounds for deportation5; and

           1.5      appeals6.

     2.    recognition of professional qualifications7;

     3.    co-ordination of social security systems8;

     4.    non-discrimination and equal treatment9; and

     5.    monitoring of citizens’ rights through the establishment of an “independent
           monitoring authority” (the IMA)10
                           1. WAA 2020, Part 3; 2. s.7; 3. s.8; 4. s.9; 5. s.10; 6. s.11; 7. s.12; 8. s.13; 9. s.14; 10. s.15


20   Once free movement has ended, beneficiaries of the citizen’s rights who have not
     secured leave to enter or remain in the UK under the EUSS by the end of the grace
     period, would no longer have a lawful basis to reside in the UK (unless further
     provision is made).


     Personal scope of the Withdrawal Agreement

21   Persons falling within the personal scope of the withdrawal Agreement1 include

     1.    EU citizens who exercised a right to reside in the UK before the end of the
           transition period and continue to reside in the UK2 or

     2.    UK nationals who exercised a right to reside in the EU before the end of the
           transition period, and who continue to reside there3 or

     3.    EU citizens who exercised a right as frontier workers in the UK before the end
           of the transition period and continue to do so thereafter4 or

     4.    UK nationals who exercised their right as frontier workers in the EU before the
           end of the transition period and continue to do so thereafter5 or

     5.    Family members of a ‘right holder’ (i.e. persons falling within 1. to 4. above),
           who are lawfully resident in the host State before the end of the transition
           period6 or

     6.    family members who are directly related to a right holder, including durable
           partners, living outside the host State before the end of the transition period, at
           the point they seek residence to join the right holder in the host State after the
           end of the transition period7 or

           Note to point 6: The relationship must have existed before the end of the
           transition period and still exist when the person seeks to join the right holder in
           the host State (Art. 1(e)(ii)). Parents of the right holder must be dependent on
           the right holder at the point they seek to join the right holder, but are not
           required to be dependent at the end of the transition period.

     7.    children born to, or legally adopted by, the right holder (see paragraph 37
           “Future Children” below)8.

     8.    Extended dependent family members of the household of those covered by
           paragraph 1. or 2. above, whose residence has been facilitated or applied for
           before the end of the transition period9.
              1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10; 2. Art. 10(1)(a); 3. Art. 10(1)(b); 4. Art. 10(1)(c); 5. Art. 10(1)(d); 6. Art.
                                                      10(1)(e)(i); 7. Art. 10(1)(e)(ii); 8. Art. 10(1)(e)(iii); 9. Art 10(2) – (4)


22   Where rights of residence are exercised under free movement rules, EU citizens and
     qualifying British citizens who lawfully reside in the host State before the end of the
     transition period fall within the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement. This is irrespective
     of whether the right of residence is permanent; or of its duration.

     Note: The Withdrawal Agreement sets out the substantive conditions that underpin
     the right of residence1 in the host State for EU citizens, UK nationals and their
     respective family members, irrespective of their nationality. Further provision2 is made
     that EU citizens and UK nationals who have such a right of residence can change their
     status and remain beneficiaries under the Withdrawal Agreement. For example, a
     person who was a worker before the end of the transition period, becomes a student
     after the end of the transition period still falls within scope of the Withdrawal
     Agreement. It is also possible to hold multiple statuses, for example a student who is
     simultaneously a worker.

                                                                          1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.13(1); 2. Art. 17(1)


     Example

     An EEA national arrives in the UK 2 weeks before the end of the transition period. He
     is residing here and exercising Treaty1 rights as a jobseeker. He falls within scope of
     the Withdrawal Agreement.

     EU citizens

23   EU citizens who have exercised their right to reside in the UK in accordance with EU
     law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter1 will
     be within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

                                                                                      1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(a)


24   They are eligible to apply to the EUSS (see paragraphs 16 - 17 above) to enable them
     to continue to reside in the UK. Their rights to claim benefits and access services in
     the UK will remain unchanged.

     Note: Further information about the EUSS can be found at DMG Chapter 7, Part 3 –
     073490 - 073495.
     UK nationals

25   UK nationals who have exercised their right to reside in a Member State in
     accordance with EU law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside
     there thereafter1 will be within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

                                                                         1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(b)


     Frontier workers

26   ‘Frontier workers’ means1 EU citizens or UK nationals who pursue an economic
     activity as workers2 or self-employed3 persons in one or more States in which they do
     not reside (see DMG chapter 7, Part 2). Union citizens4 or UK nationals5 who
     exercised their right as frontier workers, before the end of the transition period and
     continue to do so thereafter, fall within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

                                                 1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.9(b); 2. TFEU art.45; 3. Art.49;
                                                          4. Withdrawal Agreement Art.10(1)(c); 5. Art.10(1)(d)


27   Frontier workers retain their worker1 or self-employed2 status, and fall within scope3 of
     the Withdrawal Agreement, where they

     1.    are temporarily unable to work as a result of illness or accident or

     2.    are in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after being employed for more
           than a year and have registered as a jobseeker with the relevant employment
           office or

     3.    are in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after completing a fixed-term
           employment contract of less than a year, or after having become involuntarily
           unemployed during the first 12 months and have registered as a jobseeker with
           the relevant employment office or

     4.    embark on vocational training.

                                         1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.24(3); 2. Art.25(3); 3. Art.10(1) & Art.30


28   The rights of frontier workers are protected from the end of the transition period, by
     retaining their right to enter and work in the country of their employment (including
     self-employment). This cohort may apply for a specific immigration status that makes it
     clear that they are frontier workers. This will apply to EU citizens who are not living in
     the UK, but are currently working here.
29   Under the Common Travel Area (CTA) and the Reciprocal Agreement with the Irish
     Government, UK and Irish citizens will have the right to move freely and work across
     the Irish border, and so will not need to rely on these frontier worker rights.

     Note: The CTA is a long-standing arrangement between the UK, the Crown
     Dependencies (Bailiwick of Jersey, Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Isle of Man) and the
     Republic of Ireland. The CTA established cooperation between respective immigration
     authorities enabling British and Irish citizens to move freely between, and live in, these
     islands. British and Irish citizens enjoy additional rights in Ireland and the UK. These
     include (amongst others) the right to work or study, as well as to access social welfare
     benefits and health services. Both the UK and Irish governments have committed to
     taking all necessary measures to ensure that the agreed CTA rights and privileges are
     protected.

     Family members

30   Under EU law1, family members of EU citizens do not generally enjoy an independent
     right to move and reside freely (unless they fall under the exception in paragraph 31
     below). Under the Withdrawal Agreement, family members do not enjoy rights under
     the Withdrawal Agreement without these rights being derived from ‘right holder’2 i.e. a
     person who exercised their right to reside in a host State before the end of the
     transition period, and continues to reside there thereafter3 (see paragraph 21 above)

                         1. Directive 2004/38, Art. 2(2); 2. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(a) – (d); 3. Art.10(1)(a)


31   The exception1 to paragraph 30, are family members who

     1.    resided in the host State independently at the end of the transition period and

     2.    had acquired an independent right to reside in the host Member State before
           the end of the transition period.

     This is because their right of residence under EU law, at the end of the transition
     period, was no longer conditional on continuing to be a family member of an EU
     citizen who was currently exercising a Treaty right in the host Member State.

                                                                               1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art 10(1)(f)


32   In line with Directive 2004/38, the Withdrawal Agreement distinguishes between ‘core
     family members’1 and ‘extended family members’2. Core family members who have
     resided in the UK at the end of the transition period in their capacity as family
     members of an EU citizen who was exercising their rights as a qualified person in the
     UK, fall within the scope3 of the Withdrawal Agreement.
                                          1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.9(a); 2. Art.10(2) - (5); 3. Art.10(1)(e)(i)


     Note 1: A ‘core family member’ is spouse, civil partner, direct descendent under the
     age of 21 or a dependent direct relative in the ascending line1.

                                                                                    1. Directive 2004/38, Art.2(2)


     Note 2: An ‘extended family member’ is a family member falling outwith Note 1 above,
     or a partner with whom the EU citizen has a durable relationship, duly attested1.

     Note 3: For children born to, or adopted by the right holder after the end of the
     transition period, see paragraph 37 below.

                                                                                    1. Directive 2004/38, Art.3(2)


     Core family members

33   Core family members who have not moved to the UK before the end of the transition
     period, may join the right holder, at any point in time after the end of the transition
     period1.

                                                                        1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(e)(ii)


     Example

     A German national was habitually resident and working in the UK at the end of the
     transition period. They are in scope of Titles I, II & III of Part Two of the Withdrawal
     Agreement. Their family remains resident in Germany, residing there at the end of the
     transition period. As the family members have not joined the primary right holder in the
     UK by the end of the transition period, they are not in full scope of the Withdrawal
     Agreement, but do have derived rights as family members under Title II for certain
     social security coordination provisions. These rights would cease if the family link
     under the Withdrawal Agreement was broken e.g. following a divorce, or a child
     ceasing to be dependent.

     If the family members subsequently moved to join the primary right holder in the UK
     e.g. in 2023, the family members would be brought within scope of Titles I & II and
     they would have full rights under Title III. They would then maintain these rights even if
     the family link was broken.

     Extended family members

34   Extended family members1 who have resided in the UK by the end of the transition
     period by virtue of their relationship to an EU citizen exercising an EU right to reside in
     the UK fall within scope2 of the Withdrawal Agreement. This presupposes that the
     person was issued with a residence document by the HO which confirms their family
     status. Extended family members, who lodge an application to join their right holder in
     the UK before the end of the transition period, but whose application is outstanding at
     the end of the transition period, will be in scope of the Withdrawal Agreement3.

     Note: As long as the Home Office have carried out an extensive examination of the
     personal circumstance of the applicant and their relationship with their EEA family
     member, that person will be in scope of the Withdrawal Agreement even if they are not
     yet resident in the UK before the end of the transition period.

                     1. Directive 2004/38, Art.3(2)(a) – (b); Withdrawal Agreement, Art 9(a)(ii); 2. 10(2); 3. Art.10(3)


     Durable partners

35   Partners in a durable relationship1 of the right holder, but who resided outside the UK
     at the end of the transition period fall within scope2 of the Withdrawal Agreement.

                                                1. Directive 2004/38, Art.3(2)(b); 2. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(4)


36   Persons within paragraph 35 include all long-term durable partnerships, both opposite-
     sex and same-sex relationships. The requirement of the durability of the relationship
     must be assessed (in light of the objective of the Directive1) to maintain the unity of the
     family in a broad sense. Such persons would need to be in a durable relationship at
     the end of the transition period and still be in that durable relationship at the time they
     seek residence in the UK under the Withdrawal Agreement. This provision also
     includes those persons who were in a durable relationship at the end of the transition
     period, and are since married to the right holder at the time they seek residence in the
     UK. They are in scope if they have submitted their application to the Home Office
     before the end of the transition period (and it is successful). They should also be
     allowed into the UK if the relationship was durable before the end of the transition
     period and at the time they seek entry to the UK.

                                                                         1. Directive 2004/38, Recital 6 & Art. 3(2)(b)


     Future Children

37   Persons who are born to, or adopted by, the right holder after the end of the transition
     period fall within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement. When seeking to join the right
     holder in the UK, children will have to satisfy one of the conditions1 that

     1.    both parents are covered by the Withdrawal Agreement or

     2.    one parent is covered by the Withdrawal Agreement and the other is a national
           of the host State or
     3.    one parent is covered by the Withdrawal Agreement and has sole or joint rights
           of custody of the child. (Art. 1(e)(iii)). This covers children born or legally
           adopted before and after the end of the transition period.

                                                                              1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(e)(iii)


     Example 1

     A Spanish national lives and works in the UK before the end of the transition period. A
     child of the Spanish national is born in 2022 while the Spanish national continues to
     reside in the UK. The child is within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement1.

                                                                              1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.10(1)(e)(iii)


     Example 2

     A Portuguese citizen resides and works in the UK before the end of the transition
     period. Her minor children remained in Portugal, so had derived rights1 as family
     members. After the end of the transition period, her children join her in the UK,
     bringing them within full scope2 of the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Note: Once the children cease to be dependents on their parent, they would continue
     to be within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement as long as they maintain residency in
     the UK. This is because, for family members who are dependents of EU citizens or UK
     nationals before the end of the transition period, the rights provided for within Title II of
     Part Two of the Withdrawal Agreement shall be maintained even after they cease to
     be dependents3.

                                                               1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.30; 2. Art.10; 3. Art.17(2)


     Third country family members accompanying EU citizens

38   Family members1 of a right holder2 who are lawfully residing in the host State at the
     end of the transition period and who continue to reside there, fall within the scope3 of
     the Withdrawal Agreement. This includes Chen4 carers. The CJEU in the case of
     Chen4 ruled that a third country national parent has a right of residence in the host
     Member State in order to underpin the right of residence of a self-sufficient EU citizen
     minor child, for as long as that child is dependent; and where not to do so, would
     result in depriving that EU national child their right of residence.

                1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.9(a)(ii); 2. Art.10(1)(a) – (d); 3. Art.10(1)(e)(i); 4. Chen (Case C-200/02)


39   The Withdrawal Agreement1 goes beyond reference to primary carers used by the
     CJEU in Chen, and is drafted in a more open manner, to also allow persons other than
     primary carers, for example, minor siblings who also share the primary carer(s) with
     the minor EU citizen. Furthermore, where a person’s residence status under the
     Withdrawal Agreement is solely derived from being the family member of a right
     holder2, the Withdrawal Agreement3 expressly prevents them from becoming a right
     holder. This prevents them from being joined by their own family members.

                                        1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.9(a)(ii); 2. Art.10(1)(a) – (d); 3. Art.17(1)


40   During the transition period, EU citizens who move to the UK may be accompanied by
     their non-EU citizen family members. This includes direct family members (see DMG
     073252), and extended family members (see DMG 073293), as now. If the EU
     national is exercising treaty rights on 31.12.20 then the family member can stay
     beyond that date.

     Dual nationals – EU citizens

41   As EU citizens, dual EU/EU nationals (e.g. French & German nationality) or EU/non-
     EU nationals (e.g. French & Chinese nationality) who

     1.    are residing in the UK at the end of the transition period and

     2.    have exercised their right to free movement

     are covered by the personal scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Dual nationals – UK nationals

42   Dual EU/UK nationals (whether by birth or naturalisation) are covered by the
     Withdrawal Agreement if, by the end of the transition period, they have exercised free
     movement rights of residence prior to their naturalisation in either

     1.    the host Member State of whose nationality they have acquired or

     2.    in a Member State other than that of which the person holds nationality.

     Note 1: If a dual national exercises their treaty rights in a host State, then as long as
     they continue living in that host State they are covered by the scope of the Withdrawal
     Agreement. However, upon their return to their country of nationality, they no longer
     fall within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement e.g. Surinder Singh cases.

     Note 2: In line with Lounes (Case C-165/16), Dual EU/UK nationals who acquire
     nationality of the host Member State even after the end of the transition period are
     covered by the personal scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.
     Example

     A UK/French national (who held both nationalities from birth) was born in the UK. They
     move to Sweden as a self-employed worker before the end of the transition period.
     They fall within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Dual nationals – outside the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement

43   Dual EU/UK nationals who have never exercised their free movement rights (as in the
     Case C-434/09 McCarthy) are not covered by the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Example

     A UK/Spanish national was born in Spain (who held Spanish and UK citizenship from
     birth). They only resided in Spain before the end of the transition period. They would
     not fall within scope of the Withdrawal Agreement.

     Continuity of residence

44   Persons, who are temporarily absent from the UK at the moment of the end of the
     transition period, are still considered as lawful residents and their right of residence is
     consequently protected1 by the Withdrawal Agreement. This is due to the Withdrawal
     Agreement referring to ‘right of residence’ in the host State and not to ‘presence’ in the
     host State. Accordingly, this means that a person who already has a permanent right
     of residence will only lose it, if absent for more than five years2. Those who do not yet
     have permanent residence status can only be absent for a maximum of 6 months a
     year3 without losing their ability to acquire permanent residence.

     Note: In exceptional circumstances, a person may have a single absence from the
     UK/host State for a maximum of 12 consecutive months for an important reason4
     without interrupting continuity of residence. Such reasons may include for example,
     pregnancy and childbirth, serious illness, study or vocational training.

     1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.11; 2. Art.11(second para) & 15(3); 3. Art.11(first para) & 15(2); 4. Directive 2004/38,
                                                                                                                Art.16(3)


     Example 1

     EEA national acquires the right of permanent residence in the UK and leaves the UK
     four years before the end of the transition period. That EEA national should be
     considered as ‘exercising their right of residence in accordance with the Withdrawal
     Agreement (even if they do no longer have the right of permanent residence under
     Directive 2004/38) at the end of the transition period because they have not been
     absent for a period exceeding five consecutive years. They are eligible for the new
     permanent residence status in the UK, provided they apply within the set1 deadline.

                                                                   1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.18(1)(b)


     Example 2

     EEA national has been living in the UK for four years. He leaves the UK before the
     end of the transition period on 20.11.20. He returns to the UK after the end of the
     transition period, on 12.4.21. As the absence is less than the maximum of 6 months in
     a year, this absence does not affect his continuity of residence1 towards his accrual of
     5 continuous years for the purposes of acquisition of a right of permanent residence2.

                                                            1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.11; 2. Art 15(2)


     Example 3

     EEA national has been living in the UK for 18 months as a qualified person. She finds
     she is 3 months pregnant and decides to return to her family in Estonia until after the
     birth of her child. She leaves the UK on 6.12.20, before the end of the transition
     period. She returns to the UK, following the birth of her child, on 1.9.21. As her
     absence was for an important reason due to pregnancy, and was less than the
     maximum of 12 consecutive months, the absence does not break the continuity of
     residence1.

                                                              1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.11; Art 15(2)


     Accumulation of periods

45   The period of legal residence in accordance with EU free movement rules that a
     person or their family member has before the end of the transition period, will be
     counted for the completion of the period of residence of 5 years necessary to acquire
     the right of permanent residence under the Withdrawal Agreement. Such beneficiaries
     are afforded the right to acquire permanent residence status later (after accumulating
     the sufficient period of legal residence)1.

                                                                        1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art.16


     Outside the scope of the Withdrawal Agreement

     Posted workers

46   Posted workers are
     1.    EU citizens who are employed or self-employed in the UK, but are habitually
           resident in an EU Member State and are the subject of the legislation of that
           Member State or

     2.    UK nationals who are employed or self-employed in an EU Member State, but
           are habitually resident in the UK and are subject to UK legislation.

     Although posted workers are not covered by the full scope of the Withdrawal
     Agreement1, so do not have a right of residence, EU citizens and their family members
     who are employed/self-employed in the UK, but are habitually resident in an EU
     Member State and are the subject of the legislation of that Member State2; or UK
     nationals and their family members who are employed/self-employed in an EU
     Member State, but are habitually resident in the UK and are subject to UK legislation3,
     at the end of the transition period, do fall within the scope of Title III of the Withdrawal
     Agreement. This confers social security coordination rights whilst they remain within
     that scope. The Withdrawal Agreement does not confer any entitlement to posted
     workers to remain in the host Member State after the end of the transition period.

                                          1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art. 10; 2. Art.30(1)(e)(i); 3. Art.30(1)(e)(ii)


     Host State - Zambrano & Surinder Singh cases

47   For UK nationals and their family members, the ‘host State’1 is the EU Member State2
     in which they are exercising their right of residence under EU free movement rules
     before the end of the transition period and continue to reside thereafter. The UK
     cannot become the host State under the Withdrawal Agreement for UK nationals. This
     means that UK nationals who have resided in the UK before the end of the transition
     period, in accordance with rights under EU law, do not become beneficiaries of the
     Withdrawal Agreement in their personal capacity.

                                                              1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art. 9(c)(ii); 2. Art. 2(b)


48   EU citizens and UK nationals and their family members who are covered by the CJEU
     cases of C-34/09, Ruiz Zambrano, or C-370/90, Surinder Singh fall outside the scope
     of the Withdrawal Agreement. This is due to the residence status of family members of
     UK nationals returning to the UK, or of EU citizens returning to the Member State of
     which they are nationals, will be regulated by their respective UK or EU Law.

     Example

     In a Zambrano case1, the basis of the CJEU’s judgment was that, if Mr Zambrano (a
     third country national) was not granted a right to reside and a work permit in Belgium,
     the result would be that his dependent children, who were Belgian (and thus EU)
     citizens, would be deprived of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of their rights
     as EU citizens under the Treaty2. In line with the guidance above, a right to reside
     which exists in accordance with Zambrano, where that right to reside arises because a
     British citizen would otherwise be deprived of the genuine enjoyment of the substance
     of their rights as a EU Citizen, continues to be an excluded right to reside under
     domestic income related benefit regulations3.

          1. Ruiz Zambrano v Office national de l’emploi (ONEm) (Case C-34/01); 2. TFEU, Art.20; 3. IS (Gen) Regs, reg
                               21AA(3)(bb); JSA Regs, reg 85A(3)(aa); ESA Regs, reg 70(3)(bb); SPC Regs, reg 2(3)(bb)


49   For EU citizens and their family members, the ‘host State’1 is the UK2 if they exercised
     their EU right of residence in the UK before the end of the transition period and
     continue to reside in the UK thereafter.

                                                                  1. Withdrawal Agreement, Art. 9(c)(i); 2. Art. 3(1)(a)


     Future immigration system

50   The government will introduce a new immigration system from January 2021.

51   Under the future immigration system, following the ending of the transition period
     (31.12.20), those who wish to move to the UK, including EU citizens, who intend to
     work, study or join family will need permission to do so. Normally this will be in the
     form of an electronic status which must be obtained before coming to the UK. This
     means everyone coming to the UK will have an individual immigration status which will
     form the basis of our domestic immigration controls.

52   EU citizens and their family members, who arrived in the UK and have been living
     lawfully before the end of the transition period, will be eligible to apply to the EUSS
     (see paragraphs 14 - 17 above) and will have until 30.6.21 to make their application
     (see paragraph 17 – Grace Period above). EU citizens will be able to evidence their
     rights in the UK using their passport or national identity card. Alternatively, if they wish
     to do so, an EU citizen will be able to use their digital status, granted under the EUSS,
     via the Home Office’s digital status checking service. This Home Office service
     enables the person to share their digital status securely. Non-EU citizen family
     members will be able to rely on a biometric immigration document to prove their
     entitlements, also via the digital status checking service where they wish to use this.
     Family Members who are joint rights holders in the UK after the end of the transition
     period will have 3 months from their arrival to make the application, if later than the
     end of the grace period.
     The Common Travel Area and the associated rights of Irish
     citizens in the UK

53   The UK and Irish governments have made firm commitments to protecting existing
     Common Travel Area (CTA) arrangements, including the associated rights of British
     and Irish citizens in the other state. Under these associated rights, a national of the
     Republic of Ireland can exercise an EU treaty right while living in the UK without
     having to reside in another EEA state.

54   If a Northern Irish person is granted a right of residence on the basis of identifying
     themselves as Irish, or both Irish and British, then they are treated in the same way as
     a national of the Republic of Ireland. This means that Irish citizens who identify as
     Irish, or Irish and British will continue to have the right to enter, live and work in the UK
     without requiring permission.

     Note: Separate guidance is drafted in relation to persons of Northern Ireland and their
     family members – see Memo DMG 17/20.

55   Recent caselaw1 determined that despite the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement 1998
     allowing people of Northern Ireland the right to identify as British, Irish or both, it did
     not supersede national law2 which sets out the terms of citizenship for people born in
     the UK, including Northern Ireland. A person born in Northern Ireland remains a British
     citizen3, even if they identify as Irish. Family members of Irish citizens arriving in the
     UK (who are non-British, non-Irish citizens) may apply to the EUSS. Those who do
     not, will need to apply under the new immigration system if they wish to remain in the
     UK after 31.12.20.

                                              1. [2019] UKUT 355 (IAC); 2. British Nationality Act 1981; 3. s.1


     Summary

56   Until the end of the transition period, there is no change to the rules on access to
     benefits for EU citizens as a result of Britain’s exit from the EU. The HRT process
     continues to apply as it does now.

57   Where the claimant is granted pre-settled status i.e. limited leave to remain under the
     EUSS, they will not automatically have a right to reside which is relevant for the
     purposes of claiming IS, JSA, SPC or ESA. The claimant is still required to
     demonstrate that they are exercising a qualifying right to reside under the Imm (EEA)
     Regs 2016, such as worker status, self-employed status or permanent residence.

58   Income related benefit regulations1 provide that a person is to be treated as a person
     from abroad (for the purposes of IS, JSA & ESA) or treated as not in Great Britain (for
     the purposes of SPC), if that person is not habitually resident in the CTA (UK, Channel
     Islands, Isle of Man or Republic of Ireland). No person shall be treated as habitually
     resident in the CTA, without having a relevant right to reside in one of those places in
     the CTA2. Those relevant rights to reside do not include (amongst others3) a right
     which exists by having been granted limited leave to enter or remain in the UK by
     virtue of

     1.     Appendix EU to the Immigration Rules4 or

     2.     being a person with a Zambrano right to reside5.

      1. IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(1), JSA Regs, reg 85A(1), ESA Regs, reg 70(1), SPC Regs, reg 2(1); 2. IS (Gen) Regs, reg
          21AA(2), JSA Regs, reg 85A(2), ESA Regs, reg 70(2), SPC Regs, reg 2(2);3. IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3) & (3A),
                                   JSA Regs, reg 85A(3) & (3A), ESA Regs, reg 70(3) & (3A), SPC Regs, reg 2(3) & (3A);
          4. IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3A)(a), JSA Regs, reg 85A(3A)(a), ESA Regs, reg 70(3A)(a), SPC Regs, reg 2(3A)(a):
          5. IS (Gen) Regs, reg 21AA(3A)(b), JSA Regs, reg 85A(3A)(b), ESA Regs, reg 70(3A)(b), SPC Regs, reg 2(3A)(b)


59   The effect of the guidance in paragraphs 57 - 58 above is that pre-settled status
     granted under the EUSS is not a relevant right to reside for the purposes of
     establishing habitual residence. HRT DMs must continue to apply the Imm (EEA)
     Regs 2016 for claims from EU citizens and their family members who have been
     granted pre-settled status.

     Note: Although the claimant has been granted pre-settled status (which is not a
     right to reside that allows access to income-related benefits) they may still be able
     to exercise a qualifying right to reside under the Imm (EEA) Regs 2016.


     ANNOTATIONS

     Please annotate the number of this memo (Memo DMG 30/20) against DMG
     paragraphs:

     073252, 073293, 073490 (Heading)


     CONTACTS

     If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and
     Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E19, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such
     referrals should be followed, as set out in Memo DMG 04/19 - Obtaining legal advice
     and guidance on the Law.


                                                                              DMA Leeds: December 2020

     The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative
     purposes only
