07-25: DLA: ADHD and severe mental impairment – Effect of Upper
Tribunal Decision

Contents                                                         Paragraphs


Introduction                                                     1


Background                                                       2


The UT Decision                                                  3-5


Applying the UT Decision                                         6


    Qualifying for the higher rate mobility component with
ADHD                                                             7-9
    via the SMI route


Length of Award                                                  10-11


Examples                                                         12


Annotations


Contacts



Introduction

   1. This memo gives guidance on the decision of the UT in PM (by his appointee) v Secretary of State
       for Work and Pensions (DLA)1. This decision takes effect from 11.3.25.


                                                                                1 [2025] UKUT 85 (AAC)



Background

   2. DMG 61359 gives guidance that Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) does not
       constitute arrested development or incomplete physical development of the brain. Following
       current expert medical input, the UT has now reached a decision that confirms ADHD can

       constitute arrested or incomplete development of the brain1.


                                                                                1 [2025] UKUT 85 (AAC)
The UT decision

    3. The UT held that the claimant’s diagnosis of ADHD satisfies the initial part of the first limb of the
         Severe Mental Impairment (SMI) criteria which is to be
            1. suffering from a state of arrested development or
            2. incomplete physical development of the brain 1 (see Note 1).

         The UT decision2 awarded the claimant the higher rate of the mobility component as it was

         already established that he also met the other limbs of the SMI criteria 3.


  Note 1: Individuals would also need to show that their ADHD results in a severe impairment of
  intelligence and social functioning to fully meet the conditions of the first limb of the SMI criteria.


  Note 2: Full guidance on the other limbs of the SMI criteria is in DMG 61366 - 61378.


1 SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(5); 2. [2025] UKUT 85
(AAC);                                                              3 SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(5); SS (DLA)
Regs, reg 12(6); SSCB Act s 73(3)(a)(b) & (c)


    4. The UT also held that while ADHD can meet the initial part of the first condition of the SMI criteria,
         the facts and evidence in each individual case must be considered to determine whether all the

         other limbs of the SMI test are met1. In the case before the UT2, the claimant had already been
         determined to satisfy the remaining SMI criteria. As well as ADHD, he had low IQ, speech and
         language difficulties, behavioural issues, anxiety, low self-esteem and Autism Spectrum Disorder
         (ASD) traits.


  Note: Full guidance on the other limbs of the SMI criteria is in DMG 61366 - 61378.


    1. SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(5); SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(6); SSCB Act s 73(3)(a)(b) & (c);
         2. [2025] UKUT 85 (AAC)


    5. The UT also held that while claimants with ADHD may, in some cases, satisfy all parts of the SMI
         criteria, it is anticipated that cases in which a claimant with ADHD alone meets all of the
         conditions are likely to be relatively rare. This is because the SMI test requires not only a state of
         arrested development or incomplete physical development of the brain, but also evidence of
         severe impairment of intelligence and social functioning and severe behavioural problems that

         meet the strict criteria set out in legislation 1.


    1. SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(5); SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(6); SSCB Act s 73(3)(a)(b) & (c)




Applying the UT decision

    6. From 11.3.25, when considering an award of the higher rate mobility component under the SMI
         route, the UT decision1 clarifies that ADHD can satisfy the initial part of the first limb of the SMI
         criteria which is that the claimant is suffering from a state of arrested development or incomplete

         physical development of the brain2.


      1. [2025] UKUT 85 (AAC); 2. SS (DLA) Regs, reg 12(5)



 Qualifying for the higher rate mobility component with ADHD via the
 SMI route

      7. An award of the higher rate mobility component via the SMI route can only be made for a claimant
         with ADHD if the claimant also satisfies the second and third parts of the test, which are that


  1. this state of arrested development or incomplete physical development of the brain results in
severe

      impairment of intelligence and social functioning1 and
  2. the claimant exhibits disruptive behaviour which is extreme, regularly requires physical restraint
and
      is so unpredictable that they require another person to be present and watching over them
whenever

      they are awake2.


                                                        1 SS (DLA)Regs, reg 12(5); 2 SS (DLA)Regs, reg 12(6)


      8. A claimant who has ADHD but does not display severe impairment of intelligence and social
         functioning and severe behavioural problems is unable to satisfy all the parts of the SMI test and
         therefore is not entitled to an award of the higher rate mobility component via the SMI route.


      9. A claimant must also satisfy the conditions for the highest rate of the DLA care component to be

         awarded the higher rate mobility component via the SMI route1.


                                                                                  1 SS CB Act s 73(3)(a)(b) & (c)



Length of award

      10.DMG 61618 gives guidance on the length of an award. A claimant may be awarded either the
         mobility or the care component for a fixed period or for an indefinite period, but if the award of

         DLA consists of both components, they may not be awarded for different fixed periods 1.


                                                                                            1 SS CB Act s 71 (3)


      11. If awarding the higher rate mobility component under the SMI route for claimants with ADHD, a
         shorter award may be appropriate in some cases to allow for a planned review of the claimant’s
         condition. This is particularly pertinent where the claimant has ongoing medical involvement,
    there is uncertainty about the long-term impact of the condition on behaviour or functioning or
    there is evidence that the claimant’s needs may change over time.


    Note: Where a shorter award is being considered, Customer Case Management (CCM) award
    duration guidance for ADHD will be a useful reference considering all the individual facts of the
    case.



Examples

  12.Seb is 8 years old and has ADHD. He has some behavioural issues and can find it hard to
    concentrate at school. His difficulties with concentration mean that he is sometimes disruptive in
    lessons. His teacher reports that with the right support, such as talking therapies and breaking
    tasks down into more manageable chunks, Seb’s behaviour at school is improving. He has a close
    group of friends. At home, Seb’s parents report that he often displays hyperactive behaviour and
    needs prompting to complete everyday tasks such as brushing his teeth or dressing himself. He
    has difficulty sleeping and suffers from enuresis, often needing his parents to resettle him and
    change his bedding during the night. Seb enjoys playing outside with his siblings and his parents
    allow him to do this without the need to constantly watch over him. They rarely need to physically
    restrain him. There is no evidence that Seb requires physical restraint at school. It has already
    been established that Seb satisfies the conditions for the highest rate of the care component. As
    Seb has ADHD, a DM determines that he satisfies the initial part of the first condition of the SMI
    criteria: to be suffering from a state of arrested development or incomplete physical
    development of the brain. The DM also decides that there is no evidence that this state of
    arrested development or incomplete physical development of the brain is resulting in severe
    impairment of Seb’s intelligence and social functioning. They also determine that while Seb does
    have some behavioural difficulties, he is not exhibiting disruptive behaviour which is extreme,
    regularly requires physical restraint and is so unpredictable that he requires another person to be
    present and watching over him whenever he is awake. Seb therefore only satisfies the initial part
    of the first condition of the SMI criteria. As the other limbs are not met, he does not satisfy the
    SMI test overall, and therefore Seb is not entitled to the higher rate mobility component via the
    SMI route.


  13.Daisy is 5 years old and has recently been diagnosed with ADHD. She also has learning difficulties,
    a speech and language delay and displays pica tendencies. If left unattended, she will often try to
    consume substances such as her own hair and skin, rainwater from puddles and soil. She can
    become easily dysregulated and screams and bites herself or others. She regularly requires
    physical restraint to prevent causing harm to herself and those around her. It has already been
    established that Daisy satisfies the conditions for the highest rate of the care component. As
    Daisy has ADHD, a DM determines that she satisfies the initial part of the first condition of the
    SMI criteria: to be suffering from a state of arrested development or incomplete physical
    development of the brain. They also determine that her other difficulties demonstrate that the
    second part of the test is met: that this state of arrested development or incomplete physical
       development of the brain results in severe impairment of intelligence and social functioning.
       Finally, the DM determines that Daisy is exhibiting disruptive behaviour which is extreme,
       regularly requires physical restraint and is so unpredictable that she requires another person to
       be present and watching over her whenever she is awake. She therefore satisfies all limbs of the
       SMI criteria and can be awarded the higher rate mobility component. The DM also considers that
       a shorter award is appropriate to review Daisy’s circumstances given that ongoing medical
       involvement may lead to improvements in her condition.



Annotations
Please annotate the number of this memo against the following DMG paragraphs: 61255, 61350, 61351,
61352, 61355, 61359, 61360, 61376, 61377, 61618




Contacts
If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E
zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such referrals should be followed, as set out in –
Memo 4/19 Requesting case guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.


                                                      DMA (Leeds): June 2025


The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for
illustrative purposes only.
