Who decides claims and applications 01001 - 01039



Making decisions 01010 - 01029


What decisions are made by DMs 01030 - 01039


01001 Decisions on claims and applications are made by the Secretary of State. In practice the Secretary
of State does not make decisions personally. Instead, under the Carltona principle officials act on the
Secretary of State’s behalf, provided that the Secretary of State is satisfied that they are suitably trained
and experienced to do so. Throughout this Guide these officials are called decision makers (DMs).


01002 The Carltona principle dates from a judgment of the Court of Appeal in October 1943 1. The
judgment said that the Secretary of State could not possibly make every decision for which they
are constitutionally responsible and accountable to Parliament. The Secretary of State is therefore
entitled to authorize a person of suitable authority to exercise these functions on their behalf.


                                                     1 Carltona Ltd v. Commissioners of Works and others


01003 The Secretary of State provides training and approved guidance to DMs on how to make
decisions on their behalf. The DMG itself is one such form of guidance, advising DMs how to apply SS law.
DMs should note that approved guidance must be followed when applying the law to the facts of the
case. However, DMs may request advice from DMA Leeds on the application or clarification of the DMG
in cases of doubt.


Note: See DMG 01460 for guidance about legal advice as evidence.


01004 The DM takes all necessary actions on behalf of the Secretary of State, including


1. gathering information


2. making decisions on claims and applications


3. dealing with administrative matters such as suspension of payment.


Note: The DM is not an independent officer.


01005 Although a DM may undertake all these functions, in some circumstances it may be appropriate
to divide functions between different members of staff. However, there are some areas in which
functions must always be undertaken separately for business and/or system security. See Appendix 1 for
details.


01006 The DM must make a decision by considering all the evidence and applying the law, including any
relevant case law, to the facts of each case. Where the legislation specifies or implies discretion, the
