awards are made for a fixed term unless it is considered that a fixed term award is inappropriate.




Staying a decision

A2021 The DM has no power to leave a valid claim undecided but in some circumstances the DM may
stay making a decision. Staying means that the DM does not have to make a decision (or may make a
restricted decision) in cases which may be affected by the outcome of an appeal to the courts in another

case which has yet to be decided1. Further details about staying are in ADM Chapter A5.


                                                                                           1 SS Act 98, s 25



Circumstances where a claim for UC is not required

A2022 A claim for UC is not required1 when


1. a decision is made as a result of a change of circumstances, whether as originally made or revised, that
the person is not entitled to UC in cases where but for the receipt of earned income they would have
continued to be entitled to an amount of UC and


2. at the date of notification to an appropriate office of the change of circumstances referred to in
A2022 1. the person was in receipt of earned income and


3. not more than 6 months have elapsed since the last day of entitlement to UC and


4. the person provides such information as to their income at such times as may be required and the DM
is satisfied that the claimant has provided such information as may be required to determine whether an
award may be made and if so the amount and


5. since the last day of entitlement to UC the person’s circumstances have changed such that, if the
person were entitled to UC, the amount payable would not be less than the minimum amount of UC

under prescribed legislation2.


Note: This only applies to Live Service claimants.


                                              1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (C&P) Regs, reg 6(1); 2 UC Regs, reg 17


Example 1


David’s award of UC ends because his earnings increase. 4 months later his earnings decrease so that a
new award of UC can be made. No claim is required.


Example 2
Jackie’s award of UC ended because a child for who she had responsibility left the benefit unit. Jackie had
income from employment at this time. Four months after her award ended she notifies the department
that the child has re-joined the benefit unit. The new award of UC starts from the first day of the
assessment period in which the child re-joined the benefit unit. No new claim is required.


A2023 A claim for UC is also not required1 where


1. a claim to UC has been made and a decision is made, whether as originally made or revised, that they
are not entitled to UC in cases where but for the receipt of earned income they would have been entitled
to an amount of UC and


2. at the time the decision in A2023 1. was made the person was in receipt of earned income and


3. not more than 6 months have elapsed since the date of the claim and


4. the person provides information as to their earned income at such times as may be required and the
DM is satisfied that the claimant has provided such information as may be required to determine
whether an award may be made and if so the amount and


5. their circumstances change such that if they were entitled to UC the amount payable would not be

less than the minimum amount under prescribed legislation2.


Note: This only applies to Live Service claimants.


                                              1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (C&P) Regs, reg 6(2); 2 UC Regs, reg 17



Circumstances when a claim for ESA is not required

A2024 A person may be entitled to ESA without having to make a claim 1 where


1. the claimant has made and is pursuing an appeal against a decision that embodies a determination that
they do not have LCW and


2. the appeal relates to a decision to terminate or not to award ESA for which a claim was made.


Note: If a pending appeal award made without a claim is terminated a claim is required in order to
establish further entitlement to ESA.


                                                                    1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (C&P) Regs, reg 7
