14-21: Afghanistan HRT & PPT exception
Contents               Paragraphs



Introduction           1-2

Background             3-5

Income-related benefits 6-7

Disability benefits    8-9

Examples

Annotations

Contacts




INTRODUCTION

1. This Memo provides guidance on the Social Security (Habitual Residence and Past Presence)

(Amendment) Regulations 20211, which ensure the benefit entitlement from day one to certain persons
arriving in Great Britain from Afghanistan in connection with the collapse of the Afghan government that
took place on 15.8.21. The regulations only exempt individuals from the residency tests as below, and
claimants will still need to satisfy the other benefit entitlement conditions and have an appropriate
immigration status.


                                                                                            1 SI 1034/2021


2. These regulations came into force on 15.9.21 and added new categories to the list of persons who are
exempted from having to satisfy:


     • the Habitual Residence Test (HRT) for the income-related benefits, where persons have an
        appropriate immigration status,


     • the Past Presence Test (PPT), in addition to the HRT, for disability and carers benefits, where
        persons have an appropriate immigration status.


These regulations should be taken into account for any decision made from the 15.9.21, including where
the claim was received before 15.9.21. Applications made, and decided, before 15.9.21 should be
considered in accordance with the relevant benefit legislation as it stood prior to the coming in force of
these regulations (please see examples at the end of paragraph 9).
BACKGROUND

3. To be entitled to income-related benefits a claimant needs to show that they are not “a person treated
as not being in Great Britain”, which means they must have a legal right to reside and be factually
habitually resident in the Common Travel Area (CTA) (ADM C1225). To be entitled to a disability benefit a
person must be habitually resident in the CTA and be present in GB, after having been present for a
specified period of time (ADM C2021). For income-related benefits, the persons covered by these
regulations will be exempt from the HRT and for disability and carers benefits they will be exempt from
the HRT and the PPT. The exemptions will only apply to persons if they are not a person subject to
immigration control (PSIC).


4. Those in scope of these regulations will be persons who have arrived in the UK under one of the
following relocation and resettlement schemes established by the Home Office:


      (i) the Afghan Relocations and Assistance Policy (ARAP);


      https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/afghan-relocations-and-assistance-policy/afghan-
      relocations-and-assistance-policy-information-and-guidance


      (ii) the previous scheme for locally-employed staff in Afghanistan (ex-gratia scheme);


      https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/afghanistan-locally-employed-staff-ex-gratia-
      scheme/afghanistan-locally-employed-staff-ex-gratia-scheme-further-information-on-eligibility-
      criteria-and-offer-details


      (iii) The Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme (ACRS).


      https://www.gov.uk/guidance/afghan-citizens-resettlement-scheme


5. These regulations will also apply to any person not covered by one of the above schemes but who has
left Afghanistan in connection with the collapse of the Afghan government that took place on 15.8.21.
This is in relation to the income-related benefits only and therefore does not apply to the disability and
carer benefits.




INCOME-RELATED BENEFITS

6. Persons who were granted leave to remain under one of the relocation and resettlement schemes, as
well as those who were not covered by the schemes, but who arrived in Great Britain in connection with
the collapse of the Afghan government that took place on 15.8.21, who apply for an income-related
benefit, will be exempted from satisfying the HRT.


7. The relevant income-related benefits are:
    • Universal Credit,


    • Jobseeker’s Allowance (IB),


    • Employment and Support Allowance (IR),


    • Income Support,


    • State Pension Credit,


    • Housing Benefit,


    • Housing Benefit (65+)




DISABILITY AND CARERS BENEFITS

8. Persons who were granted leave to remain under one of the relocation and resettlement schemes,
who apply for a disability or carers benefit, will be exempted from satisfying the HRT and the PPT. The
HRT and the PPT exemptions do not apply to those not covered by the listed schemes when claiming
disability and carers benefits.


9. The relevant disability and carers benefits are:


    • Attendance Allowance,


    • Disability Living Allowance,


    • Personal Independence Payment,


    • Carer’s Allowance




Example One


Armineh arrived in the UK from Afghanistan on 20.8.21 with her family under the ACRS scheme.


She put in a claim for PIP on 28.8.21.


The DM looked at her claim on 10.9.21 and determined that Armineh did not pass the HRT test as she had
not served an appreciable period to show that she was habitually resident in the UK, and also did not pass
the PPT as she had not been present in the UK for 104 out of the last 156 weeks.


On 15.9.21 they submit a Mandatory Reconsideration as new regulations came into force which apply to
Armineh’s daughter. The DM would then have to look at whether the new regulations assist her by
excepting her from the HRT requirement and the PPT requirement from 15.9.21.




Example Two


Abdul arrived in the UK from Afghanistan on 29.8.21 under the ARAP scheme. He made an application to
UC on 10.9.21. The DM has not yet determined his claim. On 15.9.21 new legislation came into force that
applies to Abdul.


When looking at his claim, the DM needs to look at whether he satisfies the HRT conditions for the
period prior to 15.9.21, as well as look at whether the new regulations assist him by excepting him from
the HRT requirement from 15.9.21. It may be that Abdul is not entitled until 15.9.21.




Example Three


Farzaad arrived in the UK from Afghanistan on 10.9.21 under the former LES and made a claim to UC on
15.9.21.


The DM needs to look at whether the new regulations assist him by excepting him from the HRT
requirement from the date of claim.




ANNOTATIONS

The number of this memo should be annotated against the following paragraphs of the ADM; C1225
(heading), C1951 (heading), C2026, C2029 (heading), C2032 (heading).




CONTACTS

If you have any queries about this memo or are unsure how to apply the new regulations, please write to
Decision Making and Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for
such referrals should be followed, as set out in – Memo 7/19 Requesting case guidance from DMA Leeds
for all benefits.


                                                                             DMA Leeds: September 2021
The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for
illustrative purposes only
