Annex G

EXTRACTS FROM THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION FOR THE
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL
FREEDOMS

                                             PART I

Rights and Freedoms

Article 2

Right to life

1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law. No one shall be deprived of his life
intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime
for which this penalty is provided by law.

2. Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this Article when it
results from the use of force which is no more than absolutely necessary:

        (a)      in defence of any person from unlawful violence;

        (b)      in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully
                 detained;

        (c)      in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection.


Article 3

Prohibition of torture

No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.


Article 4

Prohibition of slavery and forced labour

1. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.

2. No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.

3. For the purpose of this Article the term “forced or compulsory labour” shall not include:

        (a)      any work required to be done in the ordinary course of detention imposed
                 according to the provisions of Article 5 of this Convention or during conditional
                 release from such detention;
        (b)      any service of a military character or, in case of conscientious objectors in
                 countries where they are recognised, service exacted instead of compulsory
                 military service;

        (c)      any service exacted in case of an emergency or calamity threatening the life
                 or well-being of the community;

        (d)      any work or service which forms part of normal civic obligations.


Article 5

Right to liberty and security

1.   Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his
liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:

        (a)      the lawful detention of a person after conviction by a competent court;

        (b)      the lawful arrest or detention of a person for non-compliance with the lawful
                 order of a court or in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation prescribed
                 by law;

        (c)      the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing
                 him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having
                 committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to
                 prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;

        (d)      the detention of a minor by lawful order for the purpose of educational
                 supervision or his lawful detention for the purpose of bringing him before the
                 competent legal authority;

        (e)      the lawful detention of persons for the prevention of the spreading of
                 infectious diseases, of persons of unsound mind, alcoholics or drug addicts or
                 vagrants;

        (f)      the lawful arrest or detention of a person to prevent his effecting an
                 unauthorised entry into the country or of a person against whom action is
                 being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.

2. Everyone who is arrested shall be informed promptly, in a language which he
understands, of the reasons for his arrest and of any charge against him.

3.   Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1(c) of this
Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise
judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial.
Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.
4.   Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take
proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and
his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.

5.   Everyone who has been the victim of arrest or detention in contravention of the provisions
of this Article shall have an enforceable right to compensation.


Article 6

Right to a fair trial

1. In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against
him, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an
independent and impartial tribunal established by law. Judgment shall be pronounced publicly
but the press and public may be excluded from all or part of the trial in the interest of morals,
public order or national security in a democratic society, where the interests of juveniles or the
protection of the private life of the parties so require, or to the extent strictly necessary in the
opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of
justice.

2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty
according to law.

3. Everyone charged with a criminal offence has the following minimum rights:

           (a)     to be informed promptly, in a language which he understands and in detail, of
                   the nature and cause of the accusation against him;

           (b)     to have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence;

           (c)     to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing
                   or, if he has not sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free
                   when the interests of justice so require;

           (d)     to examine or have examined witnesses against him and to obtain the
                   attendance and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the same
                   conditions as witnesses against him;

           (e)     to have the free assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand or speak
                   the language used in court.


Article 7

No punishment without law

1.         No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission
which did not constitute a criminal offence under national or international law at the time when
it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at
the time the criminal offence was committed.
2.      This Article shall not prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or
omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general
principles of law recognised by civilised nations.


Article 8

Right to respect for private and family life

1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence.

2.      There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right
except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others.


Article 9

Freedom of thought, conscience and religion

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes
freedom to change his religion or belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others
and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in worship, teaching, practice and
observance.

2. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as
are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of public
safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others.



Article 10

Freedom of expression

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold
opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public
authority and regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the
licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.

2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be
subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and
are necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or
public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for
the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information
received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.


Article 11
Freedom of assembly and association

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association
with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his
interests.

2. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are
prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national
security or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. This Article shall not prevent
the imposition of lawful restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed
forces, of the police or of the administration of the State.


Article 12

Right to marry

Men and women of marriageable age have the right to marry and to found a family, according
to the national laws governing the exercise of this right.


Article 14

Prohibition of discrimination

The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without
discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or other
status.


Article 16

Restrictions on political activity of aliens

Nothing in Articles 10, 11 and 14 shall be regarded as preventing the High Contracting Parties
from imposing restrictions on the political activity of aliens.


Article 17

Prohibition of abuse of rights

Nothing in this Convention may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any
right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights
and freedoms set forth herein or at their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in the
Convention.


Article 18

Limitation on use of restrictions on rights
The restrictions permitted under this Convention to the said rights and freedoms shall not be
applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been prescribed.


                                            PART II

The First Protocol

Article 1

Protection of property

Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one
shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions
provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.

The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce
such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general
interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties.



Article 2

Right to education

No person shall be denied the right to education. In the exercise of any functions which it
assumes in relation to education and to teaching, the State shall respect the right of parents to
ensure such education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and philosophical
convictions.


Article 3

Right to free elections

The High Contracting Parties undertake to hold free elections at reasonable intervals by secret
ballot, under conditions which will ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in
the choice of the legislature.


                                           PART III

The Sixth Protocol

Article 1

Abolition of the death penalty

The death penalty shall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such penalty or
executed.


Article 2

Death penalty in time of war
A State may make provision in its law for the death penalty in respect of acts committed in
time of war or of imminent threat of war; such penalty shall be applied only in the instances
laid down in the law and in accordance with its provisions. The State shall communicate to the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe the relevant provisions of that law.
