                                                                            Memo ADM 18/20


    UC - RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH NI


    Contents                                                                              Paragraphs

    Introduction                                                                          1

    The reciprocal arrangements                                                           2-7



    INTRODUCTION

1   This memo gives guidance on the UC (NI Reciprocal Arrangements) Regulations
    20201. The regulations come into force on 24.07.2020.

                            1 The Universal Credit (Northern Ireland Reciprocal Arrangements) Regulations 2020




    THE RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS

2   These are reciprocal arrangements for UC between GB and NI (known as territories)
    and cover claimants moving from one territory to another. Parallel regulations are in
    place for NI1.

                                                 1 The UC (GB Reciprocal Arrangements) regulations (NI) 2020


3   Acts omissions or events having effect in GB or NI for the purposes of the relevant
    legislation are to have corresponding effect in the other territory and in particular—

    1.    a claim for universal credit made in GB or NI has effect as if made in the other
          territory;

    2.    residence, presence or employment in GB or NI will have effect as if it were
          residence, presence or employment in the other territory;

    3.    any period time served for any purpose in GB or NI has effect as if it were
          served for a corresponding purpose in the other territory1.

                                           1 The UC (NI Reciprocal Arrangements) Regulations 2020 sch, para 2


4   A decision made in GB or NI can be revised, superseded or heard on appeal in
    whichever of the two territories the claimant is1.

                                           1 The UC (NI Reciprocal Arrangements) Regulations 2020 sch, para 3
    Example

    A person claims UC whilst in GB but is disallowed. That person moves to NI and
    appeals that decision the appeal can be heard in Northern Ireland.

5   For a revision, supersession or appeal to take place in the other territory, the person
    must be "in" that territory. A casual presence is not enough1.

                                                                                                 1 R(S) 5/85


6   If the person is not "in" that territory, the revision, supersession or appeal must be
    decided in the territory where the original decision was made.

7   None of the above shall confer a right to double benefit1.

                                          1 The UC (NI Reciprocal Arrangements) Regulations 2020 sch, para 4


    ANNOTATIONS

    Please annotate the number of this memo (ADM Memo 18/20) against the following
    ADM paragraph:

    C1



    CONTACTS

    If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and
    Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for
    such referrals should be followed, as set out in – Memo 7/19 Requesting case
    guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.

                                                                      DMA Leeds: August 2020




    The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative
    purposes only
