Chapter K4: Medium–level sanctions
Contents

Introduction ............................................................................................... K4001

What is the reduction period

Claimant aged 18 or over ............................................................................ K4010

Claimant aged 16 or 17 ............................................................................... K4020

Consideration of general work search activity ...................................... K4041

2 separate failures and 2 sanctions apply .............................................. K4051
        Chapter K4: Medium–level sanctions
        Introduction
K4001   This Chapter should be read with ADM Chapter K1 (Sanctions – general principles).
        ADM Chapter K1 gives guidance on the meaning of terms, and what considerations
        apply when determining what reduction period applies. See ADM Chapter K2 for
        guidance on good reason, ADM Chapter K8 for guidance on when the reduction has
        effect, and Chapter K9 for guidance on the amount of the reduction.

K4002   A medium–level sanction is a reduction of UC for a sanctionable failure by a
        claimant who fails for no good reason (see ADM Chapter K2) to comply with1

        1.    a work search requirement, but only in relation to the requirement to take all
              reasonable action to obtain paid work, more paid work or better paid work2–
              see K4003 – K4004 for when a higher or low–level sanction applies or

        2.    a work availability requirement3 – but see K4004 for where a higher–level
              sanction applies.

        See ADM Chapter J3 for guidance on work–related requirements. See ADM
        Chapter K1 (Sanctions – general principles) for the meaning of a ‘sanctionable
        failure’ and ‘current sanctionable failure’.
                     1 WR Act 12, s 27(2)(a); UC Regs, reg 103(1); 2 WR Act 12, s 17(1)(a); UC Regs, reg 95; 3 s 18(1)


K4003   Failure to meet a specified work search requirement usually results in a low–level
        sanction being imposed1 – see ADM Chapter K5 (Low–level sanctions). See also
        K4004 for when a low–level sanction is applied for a failure to comply with a
        specified work search requirement.
                                                                      1 WR Act 12, s 17(1)(b) & 27; UC Regs, reg 104


K4004   A higher–level sanction may be imposed where the claimant fails to comply with a
        specified work search requirement to apply for a particular vacancy for paid work1.
        Where the failure to comply with a work availability requirement is because the
        claimant did not take up an offer of paid work, a higher–level sanction may be
        imposed2. See ADM Chapter K3 (Higher–level sanctions) for detailed guidance.
                                1 WR Act 12, s 26(2)(b); 2 UC Regs, reg 102; WR Act 12, s 26(2)(c); UC Regs, reg 102


K4005   Where

        1.    a medium–level sanction has been imposed and

        2.    a restriction on the payment of benefit is imposed following a benefit fraud
              offence1

        the medium–level sanction is suspended for the period of the restriction in 2.2. See
        ADM Chapter K8 (When a reduction is to have effect) for further details. See ADM
        Chapter B2 (Loss of benefit) for guidance on benefit fraud offences.
                                                                   1 SS Fraud Act 01, s 6B, 7 & 9; 2 UC Regs, reg 108
        K4005 – K4009


        What is the reduction period
        Claimant aged 18 or over

K4010   Where the claimant is aged 18 or over on the date of the sanctionable failure, the
        reduction period is1

        1.     28 days where there has been no previous medium–level sanctionable failure
               within 365 days of the date of the current sanctionable failure or

        2.     91 days if, there was another medium–level sanctionable failure for which a
               28 or 91 day reduction was imposed within 365 days , but not 14days, of the
               date of the current sanctionable failure.

        Note: See ADM Chapter K8 (When a reduction is to have effect) for guidance on
        when the reduction begins where there is more than one sanctionable failure. See
        ADM Chapter K7 (Effect of ESA and JSA sanctions on UC) for guidance on the
        effect on UC sanctions where a sanction was imposed for the purposes of ESA and
        JSA.
                                                                             1 UC Regs, reg 103(2)(a)


K4011   This means
        1.     a failure must be within 365 days of the previous most recent sanctionable
        failure which resulted in a reduction being imposed in order to escalate to the next
        penalty and

        2.     where there are two failures within 14 days of each other a sanction will be
        imposed for each failure but the duration of the second sanction will not escalate1.


        Note: The DM considers whether there has been another sanctionable failure within
        14 or 365 days of the date of the current sancitonable failure in question for which a
        reduction was imposed. It is the period between the date of the previous most
        recent sanctionable failure and the current sancitonable failure which determines
        whether a sanction will escalate to the next level. Also see guidance in K4012 and
        ADM Chapter K1 (General Principles).
                                                                     1 UC Regs, reg 103(2); reg 101(4)


        Example 1

        Brad is awarded UC from 13.3.14 after he is made redundant when the call centre
        he works in relocates. He is subject to all work–related requirements. This includes
        a requirement to take all reasonable action to search for paid work for his expected
        hours of work a week, which Brad agreed with his personal advisor is 35 hours a
        week. This is recorded and agreed on Brad's claimant commitment.
        At an interview with his adviser, Brad gives evidence that in the week ending
        26.3.14 he only spent four hours looking for work, by drafting a CV and looking at
        job vacancies in the Jobcentre. The rest of the time he spent with his friends or
        watching TV.
        The DM determines that Brad had no good reason for not searching for the agreed
        period. Brad is treated as not complying with a work search requirement, there are
        no previous medium–level sanctions recorded and a 28 day reduction of UC is
        imposed.

        Example 2

        Terri has been entitled to UC since 2.7.14. Her award of UC was reduced for 28
        days as on 15.7.14 she had been treated as not complying with a work search
        requirement. Terri is also required to be available for work, and no limitations have
        been set on that requirement to be available. Terri notifies her adviser that she is
        going on a camping holiday for a fortnight from 15.8.14 with friends, who are
        providing the transport. She states that it will not be possible to contact her as
        mobile signals are variable, and she will not be able to leave due to lack of
        transport. She does not intend to look for work while on holiday as it will be in a
        remote rural area. The adviser considers that there is a doubt as to whether Terri is
        complying with her work availability requirement.
        The DM determines that there is no good reason for Terri not to comply with her
        work availability requirement and imposes a 91 day reduction, as this sanctionable
        failure is within 365 days (but not within 14 days) of a previous sanctionable failure
        for which a reduction was imposed.

K4012   A sanctionable failure which

        1.    is within 14 days of the date of the current sanctionable failure under
                             1
              consideration (see ADM Chapter K1 General Principles) or

        2.    resulted in a reduction at a different level or

        3.    was imposed for a sanctionable failure as in K4020 (claimant aged 16 or 17)

        does not count for the purposes of calculating which period in K4010 applies1.
                                                                               1 UC Regs, reg 101(4)


        Example 1

        Pat has been entitled to UC since 8.5.13. She is required to search for work for 35
        hours a week. At an interview with her adviser on 3.7.13, she is unable to provide
        any evidence of work search. The DM decides that there was no good reason for
        the failure, and imposes a 28 day reduction.

        Pat attends a WFI on 11.7.13. During the interview, she tells the adviser that she
        had stayed with her sister for the period 5.7.13 – 9.7.13. She had not left any
        contact details during this period. The DM determines that Pat is treated as not
having complied with a work availability requirement on 5.7.13. As this sanctionable
failure is within 14 days of the previous failure for which a reduction was imposed, a
further 28 day reduction is imposed.

Example 2

Derek claims UC from 20.5.13 after being made redundant from his job as a HGV
lorry driver. He fails for no good reason to attend his fortnightly interview at the
Jobcentre on 3.6.13, and a low–level sanction of 7 days reduction is imposed.

For the first three months of UC entitlement Derek’s adviser agrees that he can
restrict his work search to jobs as a HGV driver, and this is recorded on Derek's
claimant commitment. After this three month period has passed, Derek is subject to
no limitations on his work search and work availability requirement, and this is
agreed on an updated claimant commitment. Following this updated claimant
commitment; Derek provides no evidence that he has widened his work search or
work availability beyond that which had originally been agreed for three months. The
DM imposes a 28 day reduction. There has been no previous medium–level
sanction imposed and the previous low–level sanction is disregarded when
considering which medium–level reduction period applies.

Example 3

Paulohas not met his work search requirements as agreed on his Claimant
Commitment on four consecutive occasions. He cannot show a good reason for the
failure to comply on any of the dates concerned. The DM determines that there will
be 4 x 28 days sanctions imposed. A sanction will be imposed for each failure but
the sanctions cannot escalate to 91 days as although each failure is within 365 days
of the previous most recent failure for which a reduction was made, there is less
than 14 days between each sanctionable failure and the previous most recent
sanctionable failure.

 Dates of the medium–           Period between current        Duration of sanction
 level sanctionable             medium–level
 failures                       sanctionable failure &
                                most recent previous
                                sanctionable medium-
                                level failure

 5.10.15                        None                          28 days – it is Paulo’s
                                                              first medium-level failure


 12.10.15                       7 days                        28 days – there was a
                                                              previous medium level
                                                              sanctionable failure for
                                                              which a reduction was
                                                              imposed but the current
                                                              failure falls within 14days
                                                              (i.e. in the 13 days
                                                              immediately preceding
                                                              the failure in question) of
                                                                    the previous most recent
                                                                    sanctionable failure on
                                                                    5.10.15

         19.10.15                      7 days                       28 days – there was a
                                                                    previous medium level
                                                                    sanctionable failure for
                                                                    which a reduction was
                                                                    imposed but the current
                                                                    failure falls within 14days
                                                                    of the previous most
                                                                    recent sanctionable
                                                                    failure on 12.10.15.

         26.10.15                      7 days                       28 days – there was a
                                                                    previous medium level
                                                                    sanctionable failure for
                                                                    which a reduction was
                                                                    imposed but the current
                                                                    failure falls within 14days
                                                                    of the previous most
                                                                    recent sanctionable
                                                                    failure on 19.10.15.




        K4013 – K4019

        Claimant aged 16 or 17

K4020   Where the claimant is aged 16 or 17 on the date of the sanctionable failure, the
        reduction period is1

        1.    7 days where there has been no previous medium–level sanctionable failure
              within 365 days of the date of the current sanctionable failure or

        2.    14 days if, within 365 days of the date of the current sancitonable failure,
              there was another medium–level sanctionable failure for which a 7 or 14 day
              reduction was imposed.

        Note: Once a claimant reaches age 18 any subsequent failures will be at the aged
        18 or over level.
                                                                            1 UC Regs, reg 103(2)(b)


        Example

        Daisy is entitled to UC, and is aged 17. She attends for her fortnightly interview on
        23.10.14, and in her statement is unable to provide evidence that she was taking all
        reasonable action to look for paid work for her expected number of hours per week.
        Daisy’s 18th birthday is on 28.10.14. She replies to a request for reasons for her
        failure to search for work on 29.10.14. The DM determines that Daisy is treated as
        not complying with her work search requirement, as she had no good reason for the
        failure. Although Daisy is now 18, the DM imposes a 7 day reduction, as Daisy was
        17 when the failure occurred and there are no other medium–level sanctions
        recorded.

        Daisy fails again on 18.12.14 to meet her work–search requirements without good
        reason. The DM determines that a 91days medium–level sanction should be
        imposed as there has been a previous sanctionable failure on 23.10.14 for which a
        medium–level sanction was imposed which is within 365 days of the current
        sanctionable failure. Daisy is sanctioned at the adult level as she is now 18 years
        old on the date of the second sanctionable failure.




        K4021 – K4040



        Consideration of general work search
        activity

K4041   Where the Claimant Commitment has a generic requirement to access and apply for
        vacancies via online job matching sites, , before considering a referral for sanction,
        the advisor should review compliance considering

        1. what was reasonable for the claimant to do in context of all they have done
        during the relevant week and

        2. whether they have done everything they reasonably could to give them the best
        prospects of employment.

K4042   It is important that the DM considers the quality of all the claimant’s work search
        activities in the relevant week. It is not just about whether they have applied for all
        the jobs listed in any on line job matching service.

K4043   Universal Jobmatch was the department’s job matching account but is replaced by
        a new job matching service, ‘Find a Job’. The free government recruitment service
        will continue to connect jobseekers with thousands of employers across the UK.
        The change came into effect on 14.5.18 and access to existing Universal Jobmatch
        accounts was available up until 23:59 hours on 17/06/18, although employers
        cannot post new jobs from 17.05.18. This means ‘Find a job’ and UJ will run side by
        side between 14.05.18 and 23:59 hours on 17.06.18.

K4044   One of the fundamental differences to it’s predecessor UJ is that DWP staff will not
        be able to access the claimant’s ‘Find a Job’ account and so will not be able to save
        jobs for claimants to apply for or send messages to claimants. For further guidance
        on the ‘Find a Job’ site see ADM Chapter K5. From 18.6.18 claimants should not
        have a requirement on their claimant commitment to apply for vacancies in their UJ
        account although they may well have a requirement to access on-line sites and to
        apply for suitable vacancies and therefore the principles in K4045 will apply.
K4045   The DM makes a consideration of what

        1.   was reasonable for the individual claimant in their circumstances and

        2.   gave them the best prospects of getting into work along with all the other work
        search they may have taken in that week1. Just because jobs were available on any
        job sites the claimant may have accessed and the claimant did not apply for all of
        them would not necessarily mean a sanction would apply.

        Note 1: As in all sanction determinations the DM would consider all the facts and
        circumstances of the individual case and what is reasonable in the claimant’s
        individual circumstances. For detailed guidance on the work search requirement
        see ADM Chapter J3.

        Note 2: If the DM decides the claimant has not met the work search requirement in
        any one week, a medium–level sanction will apply.
                                                                                    1 WR Act 12, s 17


        Example
        (This example pre-dates 14.5.18 and the introduction of ‘Find a job’)

        There are 11 jobs in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of Lorian’s UJ account and the
        ‘Application History’ shows he applied for 6. There is a generic requirement on his
        Claimant Commitment that he will “log in to my Universal Jobmatch account to find
        and apply for jobs I can do”.
        Lorian states he has not applied for 5 vacancies in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page because
        the closing date for applications for 4 of them has not yet passed and he intends to
        apply for those in the next week. One vacancy was not suitable as it required as a
        minimum a qualification Lorian did not have. The 6 jobs he applied for had closing
        dates during this week and it took him several hours to complete the applications.
        Lorian can show he has done sufficient work search during this week as in addition
        to the 6 jobs he has applied for from the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of his UJ account, he
        has checked the internet daily and also applied for several other suitable jobs
        advertised on other on line sites and in newspapers which had deadlines for
        applications this week, he has attended a job interview and a Jobs Fair and spent
        several hours scanning newspapers and jobs boards. He has another job interview
        tomorrow and has spent several hours researching the employer and preparing for
        the interview. He also spent time researching on line the possibility of how to gain
        the specific qualification required for one of the vacancies as it is of particular
        interest to him.


        In consideration of whether Lorian has met the work search requirement for the
        week, the jobs he has applied for gave him the best prospects of moving into work
        as the deadlines for applications were due in the relevant week. He still has the
        opportunity to apply for the 4 others that were in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of his UJ
        account during the following week as the closing dates have not yet expired. He
        also spent time preparing for his job interview the next day and researching how to
        gain qualifications to broaden his work search and to look for better paid work.


        Lorian has met the work search requirement for that week regardless that he did not
        apply for all vacancies in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of his UJ account.


        Although this example pre dates 14.5.18 and the introduction of ‘Find a job’, the
        principles regarding the amount of work search apply as a general principle when
        considering the total amount of jobsearch in the relevant week. It is important that
        the DM considers the quality of all the claimant’s work search activities in the
        relevant week.

        K4046 – K4050



        2 separate failures and 2 sanctions apply

K4051   Where the claimant has

        1. failed or refused to apply for a particular specified vacancy without a good
              reason1 and

        2. also failed to meet their work search requirements2

        there are 2 separate failures and 2 sanctions to consider.

        Note: If in one period of 7 days the claimant did not do everything they reasonably
        could do to give them the best chance of finding work by undertaking work search
        activity, nor did they apply for a specific job they had been mandated to apply for, 2
        sanctions may apply.
                                                                     1 WR Act 12, s 26(2)(b); 2 s 17(1)(a)


        Example

        See the example of Sydney in ADM Chapter K3.
        Sydney has a generic requirement on her Claimant Commitment “to apply for all
        jobs in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of her UJ account” and also a specific job detailed in
        Section 4 of the Claimant Commitment that the work coach discussed with her and
        advised her she must apply for before the closing date. Sydney signed and
        accepted her Claimant Commitment.

        Sydney does not apply for the specified job and cannot provide a good reason for
        not doing so. She says she forgot when the closing date for applications to be made
        by was and thought she had more time to consider applying for the vacancy. She
        stated she had spent her time during that particular week applying for 2 jobs from
        the ‘Saved Jobs’ page that were nearer to her home address as she thought they
        were more suitable for her as there would have been no travelling costs to work. As
         the closing date has now passed Sydney has missed all opportunity to apply for the
         specified vacancy. The DM considers the job was a suitable vacancy for Sydney.
         Sydney is primarily looking for work in retail or warehouse work and the vacancy
         was for a full time sales assistant in a newsagents in the local town. The travelling
         involved would have been 25 minutes by bus and there is a bus twice per hour from
         her village. Sydney was advised on the Claimant Commitment of all the relevant
         details of the vacancy, when the closing date was and the consequences if she
         failed to apply and the DM decides that a higher–level sanction is appropriate for the
         failure. As there has been no previous higher–level sanctions in the preceding 364
         days of the current failure a 91 day sanction is applied to the TORP.

         In the same 7 day period Sydney has also failed to meet her work search
         obligations. There are 20 suitable jobs in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page of her UJ account
         and the one specified vacancy in Section 4.
         Sydney applied for only 2 of the vacancies in the ‘Saved Jobs’ page which were the
         2 nearest to her home address and would not involve any travel costs. She says
         she did check and read through the details of the other jobs in the ‘Saved Jobs’
         page but did not apply for any of them and has not done any other work search. She
         says she wants to work on the local industrial estate where her friend works so she
         can walk to work and reduce her outgoings. Sydney’s friend has told her some jobs
         will be available for packers at the warehouse outlet where she works on the local
         industrial estate very soon.


         The DM considers Sydney has not done everything she reasonably could do to look
         for work and give her the best prospects of getting work in the relevant 7 day period.
         The DM imposes a medium–level sanction for 91 days as this is the 3rd
         sanctionable failure where a medium–level sanction has previously been imposed
         within 365 days.



         Therefore in this case 2 sanctions are imposed on Sydney’s UC:

         1) a higher–level sanction for the failure to apply without a good reason for the
         specified vacancy and

         2) a medium–level sanction for the failure to do all reasonable work search in the
         relevant week.

         K4052 – K4999




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for
illustrative purposes only
