                                                              Memo ADM 14/20


UNIVERSAL CREDIT – MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS
     2020

Contents                                                                   Paragraphs

Introduction                                                               1

Earnings threshold calculation applied to grace period                     2–5

Evidence and Information in connection with an award                       6

Annotations

Contacts



INTRODUCTION

1.    This memo gives guidance on changes to UC introduced by the Universal
      Credit (Miscellaneous Amendments) Regulations 2020 (UC (Misc Amdts) Regs
      20) (SI 2020 611). The changes take effect from 13.7.201.

                                                               1 UC (Misc Amdts) Regs 20, reg 1


EARNINGS THRESHOLD CALCULATION APPLIED TO GRACE
PERIOD

2.    For households where the benefit cap is applied through Universal Credit there
      can be a period of 9 months, known as a grace period, during which time their
      benefit may not be capped.

3.    To qualify for a grace period, the household earnings must have been at least
      the relevant earnings threshold for the previous 12 months/assessment periods.

4.    In UC, when the earnings threshold has been met, the benefit cap grace period
      is to be calculated using the national living wage as at the beginning of each
      month or assessment period in which the claimant was working.

5.    As the amount of the national living wage changes each year, this clarification
      will ensure that the correct amount of national living wage, relating to the time
      when the work was undertaken, is used to calculate whether a grace period
      applies1. Due to this change, the reference to £430 will be removed as it is no
      longer relevant.

                                                                               1 UC Regs, reg 82(5)




EVIDENCE AND INFORMATION IN CONNECTION WITH AN AWARD

6.    Where

      1. a claimant’s award of UC includes an amount in respect of housing costs or


      2. the award may be revised or superseded to include such an amount,

      a landlord must supply information or evidence in connection with the award, or
      any question arising out of it, as the Secretary of State may require. This must
      be done within one month of being required to do so or such longer period as is
      considered reasonable1.

      Note: If the landlord fails to provide the relevant information or evidence within
      the appropriate timescale, please see ADM A4310.

                                                         1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (C&P) Regs, reg 38(9)




ANNOTATIONS

Please annotate the number of this memo (Memo ADM 14/20) against ADM
paragraphs:

A2118 (heading), E5052, E5053


CONTACTS

If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and
Appeals (DMA) Leeds, 3E zone E, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for
such referrals should be followed, as set out in – Memo 7/19 Requesting case
guidance from DMA Leeds for all benefits.

                                                                   DMA Leeds: July 2020



The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative
purposes only
