Chapter R3: JSA claimant
responsibilities – the claimant
commitment
Contents

What the claimant commitment is

Introduction.................................................................................................. R3001

Information included in the claimant commitment ....................................... R3004

Accepting the claimant commitment ........................................................... R3006

Date of acceptance of the claimant commitment ........................................ R3008

    Extending the period of time to accept the claimant commitment ......... R3015

Exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant commitment ........... R3020

    Lacking capacity..................................................................................... R3021

    Exceptional circumstances .................................................................... R3025

Reviewing the claimant commitment .......................................................... R3030
        Chapter R3: JSA claimant
        responsibilities - the claimant
        commitment

        What the claimant commitment is
        Introduction

R3001   It is a condition of entitlement to JSA that a claimant has accepted a claimant
        commitment1. Unless a claimant commitment

        1.    has been accepted or

        2.    can be treated as having been accepted

        then there can be no entitlement to JSA.
                                                                                1 JS Act 95, s 2(1)(b)

R3002   A claimant commitment is a record of a claimant’s responsibilities in relation to an
        award of JSA1. In order to receive JSA without a reduction the claimant is expected
        to carry out what is required of them as recorded on their claimant commitment.
                                                                                 1 JS Act 95, s 6A(1)

R3003   It is the responsibility of the Secretary of State to prepare for a JSA claimant a
        claimant commitment. A claimant commitment can be

        1.    reviewed and

        2.    updated

        at such times as the Secretary of State sees fit1.
                                                                                 1 JS Act 95, s 6A(2)

        Information included in the claimant commitment

R3004   A claimant commitment must include1

        1.    a record of the requirements that the claimant must comply with in connection
              with an award of JSA, or such of them as the Secretary of State considers it
              appropriate to include and

        2.    any information specified in regulations and

        3.    any other information that the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
                                                                                 1 JS Act 95, s 6A(4)
R3005   The claimant commitment can be in any form as the Secretary of State sees fit1.
        The claimant commitment will be a written document which can be accepted in
        various ways (see R3007).
                                                                                       1 JS Act 95, s 6A(3)




        Accepting the claimant commitment
R3006   In order to be entitled to JSA, a claimant can only be said to have accepted a
        claimant commitment where it is

        1.    the most up-to-date version and

        2.    accepted by the claimant in the manner specified in regulations and further by
              the Secretary of State1.
                                                                1 JS Act 95, s 6A(5); JSA Regs 13, reg 7(3)

        Example

        Jenny is in receipt of JSA. Her claimant commitment recorded that Jenny had to
        complete some specific actions with regard to work search. Jenny has now
        completed those actions so a new claimant commitment needs to be drawn up
        reflecting the new actions which are required of her.

R3007   The methods by which a claimant commitment can be accepted by a person is set
        out in regulations as

        1.    electronically or

        2.    by telephone or
                        1
        3.    in writing .

        The Secretary of State then specifies which of these methods are to be used by a
        person to accept their claimant commitment.
                                                                                   1 JSA Regs 13, reg 7(3)

        Date of acceptance of the claimant commitment
R3008   There will often be a gap of time between the date of

        1.    claim and

        2.    acceptance

        of the claimant commitment.

R3009   Where there is such a gap then the claimant can be treated as having accepted the
        claimant commitment on the first day in respect of which the claim has been made.
        However, the claimant commitment has to be accepted within a time specified by
                                1
        the Secretary of State . This may be referred to as a “cooling off” period.
                                                                                   1 JSA Regs 13, reg 7(1)
R3010   The claimant commitment is generated as a result of a conversation with the
        claimant. There may be occasions where the claimant refuses to accept their
        claimant commitment. The claimant must be offered a cooling off period so that they
        can reconsider. The cooling off period should be a maximum of seven calendar
        days.

        Example 1

        Jack made his claim to JSA on 20.5.13. However, he was unable to be seen by the
        Jobcentre to discuss and accept his claimant commitment straightaway. An
        appointment was made for 28.5.13. When Jack attends the Jobcentre on 28.5.13,
        he accepts his claimant commitment and is treated as having accepted it on
        20.5.13. This therefore allows Jack to meet that particular condition of entitlement
        for JSA from the date of claim.

        Example 2

        Chris made his claim for JSA on 20.5.13. A claimant commitment is drawn up but
        Chris is not entirely happy with the requirements recorded on it. Chris’s adviser
        allows Chris time to consider the contents of the claimant commitment and the
        consequences for Chris of not accepting the claimant commitment. Chris is given up
        to seven calendar days to consider this. After four days, Chris decides to accept the
        claimant commitment and so it takes effect from 20.5.13.

        Example 3

        Michelle made her claim for JSA on 20.5.13. A claimant commitment is drawn up
        but Michelle is not entirely happy with the requirements recorded on it. Michelle’s
        adviser allows Michelle time to consider the contents of the claimant commitment
        and the consequences for Michelle of not accepting the claimant commitment. She
        is given up to seven calendar days to consider this. Seven days pass and Michelle
        makes no contact regarding the claimant commitment. The DM decides that in
        respect of the claim for JSA made on 20.5.13, Michelle is not entitled. This is
        because a claimant commitment has not been accepted.

        R3011 – R3014


        Extending the period of time to accept the claimant commitment

R3015   The period of time within which a person is required to accept

        1.      a claimant commitment or

        2.      an updated claimant commitment

        can be extended.
R3016   The extended period of time applies where the claimant has requested that the
        Secretary of State review

        1.     any action proposed as

               1.1   a work search requirement or

               1.2   a work availability requirement or

        2.     whether any limitation should apply to

               2.1   a work search requirement or

               2.2   a work availability requirement

        so long as the Secretary of State considers the request as reasonable1.
                                                                               1 JSA Regs 13, reg 7(2)

        R3017 – R3019


        Exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant
        commitment
R3020   A claimant is not required to meet the basic condition of entitlement of having to
        accept a claimant commitment if1

        1.     they lack capacity to do so or

        2.     exceptional conditions apply and it would be unreasonable to expect the
               claimant to accept one.
                                                                                 1 JSA Regs 13, reg 8

        Lacking capacity

R3021   A claimant does not have to meet the basic condition of accepting a claimant
        commitment where they lack the capacity to do so1.
                                                                               1 JSA Regs 13, reg 8(a)

R3022   In this context, “lack the capacity” primarily relates to those claimants with an
        appointee acting on their behalf. However, a decision should be made based on the
        available evidence as to whether or not a claimant lacks the capacity to accept a
        claimant commitment.

        Example 1

        Paula has severe learning disabilities. She has made a claim to JSA with an
        appointee completing the claim on Paula’s behalf. After a discussion with the
        appointee, Paula’s adviser at the Jobcentre decides that Paula is not required to
        accept a claimant commitment because her learning disabilities mean that Paula
        cannot understand the expectations or requirements in connection with a claim to
        JSA.
        Example 2

        Dai makes a claim for JSA with the help of his neighbour. The neighbour isn’t Dai’s
        appointee but is helping him with the claiming process. During the new claim
        interview with his adviser, it becomes apparent that Dai does not understand what is
        required of him with regards to entitlement to JSA. The adviser decides that Dai
        should be referred for appointee action. An appointee is later authorised to act on
        Dai’s behalf. Dai is not required to accept a claimant commitment.

R3023   Where it is accepted that a claimant lacks capacity then the requirement to accept a
        claimant commitment is lifted. An appointee is not required to accept a claimant
        commitment on the claimant’s behalf and should not be asked to do so.

        R3024

        Exceptional circumstances

R3025   The claimant is not required to accept a claimant commitment where1

        1.    exceptional circumstances apply and

        2.    it would be unreasonable to expect the claimant to accept a claimant
              commitment.
                                                                             1 JSA Regs 13, reg 8(b)

R3026   Examples of when exceptional circumstances apply may include where

        1.    the claimant is incapacitated in hospital and is likely to be there for weeks

        2.      the Jobcentre is closed due to an emergency, for example, a fire or a flood

        3.    there is a domestic emergency preventing the claimant from accepting the
              claimant commitment.

        This list is not exhaustive. When determining whether or not exceptional
        circumstances apply, the DM should remember that the normal everyday meaning
        of “exceptional” is “unusual; not typical”.

        Note: Once the exceptional circumstances have passed then the claimant is
        required to accept a claimant commitment.

R3027   The DM has to take into account the circumstances of each individual case in
        deciding whether it is also unreasonable to expect the claimant to accept the
        claimant commitment.

        Example 1

        Norma made a claim to JSA but due to a fire at the Jobcentre was unable to attend
        the meeting with her adviser to accept her claimant commitment. The DM treated
        Norma as having accepted her claimant commitment and so Norma became entitled
        to JSA. Now that the Jobcentre is re-opened, Norma is required to accept a claimant
        commitment drawn up by her adviser.

        Example 2

        Roxy has made a claim to JSA. On the day that she is due to meet her adviser to
        accept her claimant commitment she is, at short notice, given an appointment at her
        hospital to have a long awaited operation. Roxy is expected to be in hospital for
        some time but is unsure for exactly how long at this stage. It would be unreasonable
        to expect Roxy to cancel her operation in order to accept her claimant commitment.
        Once she has been discharged from hospital, another appointment can be booked
        with her adviser to accept her claimant commitment.

        Example 3

        Ken has made a claim to JSA. On the day that he is due to accept his claimant
        commitment, he phones the Jobcentre to say that he cannot attend because his
        washing machine has broken and an engineer is due to fix it that day. However, Ken
        lives with his unemployed mother and she can be at home for the engineer. The DM
        does not treat Ken as having accepted his claimant commitment because it is not
        unreasonable to expect Ken to arrange with his mother to deal with the engineer.

        R3028 – R3029

        Reviewing the claimant commitment

R3030   A claimant commitment can be reviewed and updated at such time as the Secretary
        of State sees fit1. Where the claimant’s work-related requirements change then the
        claimant commitment should record this.
                                                                                 1 JS Act 95, s 6A(2)

        Example

        Roger has been in receipt of JSA for three months. He has no work and has failed
        to find any since losing his job in retail prior to his claim for JSA. Roger has worked
        in retail for all of his working life. Roger’s claimant commitment includes his work
        search requirements which are mainly centred on looking for work in his former
        occupation. Roger’s adviser at the Jobcentre decides that Roger’s work search
        should be broadened to also include work other than just retail work. Roger’s
        claimant commitment is updated to reflect this wider work search requirement and
        Roger has to accept the updated claimant commitment in order to retain entitlement
        to JSA.

R3031   Where a claimant commitment has been reviewed and updated then the claimant
                                                               1
        must accept it in order to maintain entitlement to JSA .
                                                                                 1 JS Act 95, s 6A(5)

        R3032 – R3999
The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for
illustrative purposes only
