06-18: The Universal Credit (Work -Related Requirements) In Work
Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015



Contents                                                                                Paragraphs

Introduction                                                                            1


Changes


 Circumstances in which requirements must not be imposed: weekly earnings               2–3


The In Work Pilot Scheme


 Purpose of the Scheme


   Claimants participating in the Scheme to be subject to work-related requirements     4


 Selection of participants                                                              5–6


 Qualifying claimants


Circumstances in which the In Work Pilot Scheme will no longer apply to selected        7

claimants
                                                                                        8

Notification                                                                            9 -10


Expiry of the In Work Pilot Scheme


Annotations                                                                             11 -13


Contacts                                                                                14



INTRODUCTION
      1     This memo provides guidance on the UC(Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme

      and Amendment Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015 / 89). The regulations came into force on 19.2.151 and

      were extended on 2.2.182 by the UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Progression Scheme

      (Extension) Order 2018 (S.I. 2018 / 168) .


               1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations
2015, reg 1;
                             UC(Work-Related Requirements) In Work Progression (Extension) Order
2018, reg 2.



      CHANGES

      Circumstances in which requirements must not be imposed: weekly
      earnings

2. ADM J3192 et seq provides guidance on the circumstances in which work-related requirements must
not be imposed. ADM J3231 - J3233 provides guidance on when the work search and work availability
requirements should not be imposed because the DM is satisfied that the
   1. claimant or


   2. claimant and their partner where they are a couple
have combined weekly earnings at a level where they should not be required to meet those requirements
at the present time.


3. From 19.2.15 the work search requirement and work availability requirement must not be imposed

where1


      1. the claimant has weekly earnings that are equal to, or more than, £5 plus the applicable amount
of the JSA
         personal allowance for a single person aged 25 or over or


      2. the claimant is a member of a couple whose combined weekly earnings are equal to, or more
than, £10 plus
         the applicable amount of the JSA personal allowance for a couple where both members are aged
18 or over.


      The reference amount applicable to a claimant or joint claimants is referred to as the
      Administrative Earnings Threshold (AET).


      Note: The weekly earnings in 1. and 2. only include earnings that are employed earnings. See ADM

      Chapter H3 for the meaning of employed earnings2.


                                                                        1 UC Regs, reg 99(6); 2 reg 99(6A)


      Example


      Anton is a single claimant in receipt of UC and is subject to all work-related requirements. He starts
      work in a café and receives net weekly earnings of £90 a week. The JSA personal allowance for a
      person aged 25 or over is £72.40. Anton’s earnings are in excess of £5 plus £72.40 therefore a
      work search and a work availability requirement cannot now be imposed on him.
THE IN WORK PILOT SCHEME

Purpose of the Scheme

4 The purpose of the scheme is to test the extent to which the imposition of work-related requirements
on claimants in low-paid work is likely to promote their
  1. remaining in work or


  2. obtaining or being able to obtain more work or better-paid work 1.


Note: The work-focused interview and work preparation requirements continue to apply as normal.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 41;
                                 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment
                                                                               Regulations 2015, reg 4(1)


      Claimants participating in the Scheme to be subject to work-related requirements
5. The suspension of work-related requirements for claimants whose weekly earnings reach a certain
level, as described in paragraph 3 above, will not apply to those claimants who are chosen to participate

in the In Work Pilot Scheme and notified accordingly 1.


  1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015, reg 4(2)


6. Claimants who participate in the In Work Pilot Scheme will be subject to the same requirements
(including the same limitations and safeguards) as claimants who are not in work or earning below the
Administrative Earnings Threshold.


      Selection of participants
7. The Secretary of State may select claimants to participate in the In Work Pilot Scheme on a random

sampling basis1. The Secretary of State may make a selection on more than one occasion and may limit
each selection to qualifying claimants


1. living in a particular geographical area or


2. who have become qualifying claimants within a particular period of time as determined by the

Secretary of State2.


            1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015,
                                                                                        reg 5(1)& reg 5(2)


      Qualifying claimants
8. A qualifying claimant means1 a person who
 1. is subject to all work-related requirements and


 2. has weekly earnings, or, if the person is a member of a couple, the couple has combined weekly
earnings above
   the AET, so that if they are not selected for the pilot scheme, the work search and work availability
requirement
   would not be imposed and


 3. is not a person where work-related requirements must not be imposed due to them


       3.1 being a victim of domestic violence or


       3.2 being a prisoner or


       3.3 being temporarily absent from GB for treatment or convalescence for a period not expected
      to (and which does not) exceed six months or


    3.4 having within the last six months experienced the death of


            3.4.a the other member of the couple, where the claimant is a member of a couple or


            3.4.b a child or qualifying young person for whom the claimant or where the claimant is a
            member of a couple, the other member was responsible or


            3.4.c a child, where the claimant was the child’s parent or




      3.5     receiving and participating in a structured recovery-orientated course of alcohol or drug
      dependency treatment for a period of up to six months or


      3.6     being under protection due to their involvement in investigations or proceedings for a
      period of up to six months or


      3.7     being unfit for work for a period longer than 14 consecutive days.


      Note: ADM J3180 et seq provides guidance on the above categories.


    1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015, reg 7




     Circumstances in which the In Work Pilot Scheme will no longer apply to
     selected claimants

9. A claimant who has been selected for the In Work Pilot Scheme in accordance with paragraph 7 of this
memo will no
 longer be required to participate in the In Work pilot scheme if


      1. the claimant ceases to be a qualifying claimant under paragraph 8 above or


      2. the Secretary of State decides that the claimant should no longer participate in the pilot
      scheme because


             2.1 the claimant has moved to live in a different geographical area or


             2.2 the Secretary of State has decided that the testing of work-related requirements which
             have been imposed on the claimant has concluded.


10. Where a claimant has only ceased be a qualifying claimant under paragraph 8 because of a change in
their weekly earnings (or combined weekly earnings where the claimant is a member of a couple), the
claimant will be subject to the In Work Pilot Scheme again if the claimant becomes a qualifying claimant
unless in the intervening period


      1. the In Work Pilot Scheme has ceased to apply to the claimant for some other reason or


      2. the claimant has ceased to be entitled to UC for a continuous period of six months or more.



     Notification

11. A claimant must be notified in writing that they have been selected for the In Work Pilot Scheme in

accordance with paragraph 71.


    1 UC(Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015, reg 6(1)



12. A claimant must also be notified when they are no longer required to participate in the In Work Pilot
Scheme where
    1. they are no longer a qualifying claimant (unless the claimant is no longer a qualifying claimant
only because
       of a change in earnings) or
    2. the Secretary of State has determined that the claimant should no longer participate in the In
Work Pilot
        Scheme because


                 2.1   they have moved to live in a different geographical area or


                 2.2   the Secretary of State has determined that the testing of particular work-related
             requirements
                       that have been imposed on that person has concluded.
       Note: A notification sent by post to a claimant’s last known address is treated as having been given

       or sent on the day that it was posted1.


   1 UC(Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015, reg 6(2)



13. The guidance in Appendix 1 to ADM Chapter A2 applies to the delivery of notifications by electronic

means1.


  1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme and Amendment Regulations 2015, reg 6(3)




       Expiry of the In Work Pilot scheme

14. The original pilot scheme has been extended and continues to have effect until the end of the period

of twelve months beginning with 19.2.181


                  1 UC (Work-Related Requirements) In Work Pilot Scheme (Extension) Order 2018, reg 2.




       ANNOTATIONS

       Please annotate the number of this memo (ADM 6/18) against the following ADM paragraphs:


       J3192, J3231



       CONTACTS

       If you have any queries about this memo, please write to Decision Making and Appeals (DMA)
       Leeds, GS36, Quarry House, Leeds. Existing arrangements for such referrals should be followed, as
       set out in Memo DMG 03/13 - Obtaining legal advice and guidance on the Law.


DMA Leeds: February 2018




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only
