ADM Chapter J1: The claimant commitment



Subpages

  • Introduction
  • What the claimant commitment is J1001 - J1003
  • Information included in the claimant commitment J1004 - J1005
  • Accepting the claimant commitment J1006 - J1007
  • Date of acceptance of the claimant commitment J1008 - J1019
  • Exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant commitment J1020 - J1029
  • Reviewing the claimant commitment J1030 - J1999
Introduction
This chapter contains guidance on the claimant commitment in UC
What the claimant commitment is J1001 - J1003

J1001 It is a condition of entitlement to UC that a claimant has accepted a claimant commitment 1. For

joint claimants, it is a condition of entitlement that each of them has accepted a claimant commitment 2.
Unless a claimant commitment


1. has been accepted or


2. can be treated as having been accepted


then there can be no entitlement to UC (see further guidance at J1006). For joint claimants if either
member of the couple refuses to accept a claimant commitment then the couple are not entitled to UC.


Note 1: There is a fundamental difference between an undertaking being accepted by a claimant and a
mandatory requirement being imposed by the Secretary of State. A failure to comply with the
requirements within the claimant commitment does not entail any breach of the conditions of
entitlement or mean that it has ceased to be accepted. Such failures would lead to consideration of a
sanction (see J1002). However, there can be no entitlement to UC if the claimant has not accepted a
claimant commitment and failure to accept a claimant commitment at the outset of the claim will result
in a disallowance of UC.


Note 2: There may be circumstances where the requirement to accept a claimant commitment can be
removed temporarily or permanently. For guidance on acceptance of the claimant commitment see
J1008. For guidance on the exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant commitment see
J1020.


Note 3: Where commitments are reviewed during an award see the guidance at J1030 et seq.


                                                                  1 WR Act 12, s 4(1)(e); 2 s 3(2)(a) & s 4(1)(e)



J1002 Once accepted the claimant commitment is a record of a claimant’s responsibilities during an

award of UC1. A failure to comply with a work-related requirement for no good reason will result in a

reduction in the award of UC1.


Note: Although a reduction (sanction) may be imposed for failures to comply for no good reason with
work-related and connected requirements that are recorded in the claimant commitment, there is no
direct sanction for a failure to comply with a requirement just because it is included in the claimant
commitment. A failure to comply with any requirement imposed by the Secretary of State is a matter for
a potential sanction and consideration of whether what was specified is unreasonable and whether a
sanction is applicable is to be considered under good reason. For full guidance on failures to comply,
good reason and sanctions see ADM Chapters K1 to K9. In particular see guidance regarding the public
law principles of fairness at K1151 et seq. For the relevance of the claimant commitment when
considering whether a sanction can be imposed see guidance at ADM K1176.




                                                                           1 WR Act 12, s 14(1), 2 s 26 & 27



J1003 It is the responsibility of the Secretary of State to prepare for each UC claimant a claimant
commitment. A claimant commitment can be


1. reviewed and


2. updated


at such times as the Secretary of State sees fit1..



Note 1: At the outset of a claim, the claimant commitment should be set out after a full and cooperative
discussion with the claimant where the claimant accepts that the requirements within it are reasonable
and achievable (also see J1004, J1010 and J1011). The claimant commitment should be tailored to the
individual claimants’ circumstances taking account of any restrictions or limitations, complex needs and
vulnerabilities (also see Note 2. at J1004).


Note 2: Where the commitments are to be reviewed during an award see the guidance at J1030 et seq.


                                                                                       1 WR Act 12, s 14(2)
Information included in the claimant commitment J1004 - J1005

J1004      A claimant commitment must include1


      1.     a record of the requirements that the claimant must comply with in connection with an award
      of UC, or such of them as the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to include and


      2.     any information specified in regulations and


      3.     any other information that the Secretary of State considers appropriate.


Note 1: The claimant commitment may also include a connected requirement 2 see ADM Chapter J3 for
more guidance.


Note 2: The requirements within a claimant commitment must be reasonable and achievable and be
tailored to the individual claimant, fully taking into account all their circumstances, the local job market
and any extenuating circumstances or relevant restrictions at the time. Requirements must be based on
the claimant's personal circumstances, including considering the impact of their health and wider
situation. Claimants with a health condition or disability, including those who are immunocompromised,
should have commitments based on their personal circumstances. For example, claimant commitments
would have to acknowledge the reality of the local jobs market and the claimant's personal
circumstances. The claimant has to be allowed to adhere to any current public health advice including
local and national related restrictions. It is important to respect and be considerate of those who may
wish to retain a more cautious approach to protect themselves and others. The claimant commitment
should reflect any personal limitations, restrictions and special requirements the claimant may have. For
full guidance on setting work-related requirements see ADM Chapter J3.

Note 3: Acceptance of a claimant commitment does not mean the claimant has agreed with the
requirements nor does it mean there is a personal commitment to carrying out the stated requirements.
The information within it is insufficiently specific and the requirements are often merely generic. The
claimant commitment imposes requirements but further communications are required to set the
requirement of a specific activity on a given date at a specific time. For example the claimant
commitment may require the claimant to take part in interviews with their work coach but a further
notification will be required, usually set via a 'To do' in the claimant's journal, detailing the specific time,
date, place and reason for the appointment in basic terms. For further guidance on the relevance of the
information included within the claimant commitment see the section on the public law principles of
fairness in ADM Chapter K1 (Sanctions – general principles).


Note 4: If the requirements have to be reviewed see the guidance at J1030 et seq.


                                                                                   1 WR Act 12, s 14(4), 2 s 23(4)




J1005      The claimant commitment can be in any form as the Secretary of State sees fit 1. The claimant
commitment will be a written document which can be accepted in various ways (see J1007).
1 WR Act 12, s 14(3)
Accepting the claimant commitment J1006 - J1007

Accepting the claimant commitment

J1006 In order to be entitled to UC, a claimant can only be said to have accepted a claimant
commitment where it is


1. the most up-to-date version and


2. accepted by the claimant in the manner specified in regulations and further by the Secretary of State 1.



Note 1: If the claimant declines to accept a claimant commitment at the outset of the claim to UC this
would result in a disallowance of the claim.


Note 2: If during an award there is a requirement to accept revised commitments see the guidance at
J1030.




                                                                   1 WR Act 12, s 14(5); UC Regs, reg 15(4)




J1007 The methods by which a claimant commitment can be accepted by a person is set out in
regulations as


1. electronically or


2. by telephone or


3. in writing1.


The Secretary of State can specify which of these methods are to be used by a person to accept their
claimant commitment.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 15(4)
Date of acceptance of the claimant commitment J1008 - J1019

Date of acceptance of the claimant commitment

J1008 There will often be a gap of time between the date of


1. claim and


2. acceptance


of the claimant commitment.



J1009 Where there is such a gap then the claimant can be treated as having accepted the claimant
commitment on the first day in respect of which the claim has been made. However, the claimant

commitment has to be accepted within a time specified by the Secretary of State 1. This may be referred
to as a “cooling off” period.


                                                                                      1 UC Regs, reg 15(1)



J1010 At the outset of a claim to UC, the claimant commitment is usually generated as a result of a
conversation with the claimant (also see J1011). There may be occasions where the claimant refuses to
accept their claimant commitment. The claimant must be offered a “cooling off” period so that they can
reconsider. The “cooling off” period should be a maximum of seven calendar days.


J1011 Claimants who fall into the


1. all work-related requirements group or


2. work preparation group


will need to have a discussion with a work coach before a claimant commitment can be drawn up and
accepted. Claimant commitments for claimants not in either the all work-related requirements group or
the work preparation group may be accepted as part of the normal claims process.


Note 1: The requirements within the claimant commitment must be reasonable and achievable and fully
take into account all the claimants’ individual circumstances, the local job market and any extenuating
circumstances (also see J1004).


Note 2: See guidance at J1030 where a change to the claimant commitment is required during an
existing award.


Example 1
Jack made his claim to UC on 20.5.13. However, he was unable to be seen by the Jobcentre to discuss
and accept his claimant commitment straightaway. An appointment was made for 28.5.13. When Jack
attends the Jobcentre on 28.5.13, he accepts his claimant commitment and is treated as having
accepted it on 20.5.13. This therefore allows Jack to meet that particular condition of entitlement for UC
from the date of claim.



Example 2


Chris made his claim for UC on 20.5.13. A claimant commitment is drawn up but Chris is not entirely
happy with the requirements recorded on it. Chris’s work coach allows Chris time to consider the
contents of the claimant commitment and the consequences for Chris and his household of not
accepting the claimant commitment. Chris is given up to seven calendar days to consider this. After four
days, Chris decides to accept the claimant commitment and so it takes effect from 20.5.13.



Example 3


Michelle made her claim for UC on 20.5.13. A claimant commitment is drawn up but Michelle is not
entirely happy with the requirements recorded on it. Michelle’s work coach allows Michelle time to
consider the contents of the claimant commitment and the consequences for Michelle and her
household of not accepting the claimant commitment. She is given up to seven calendar days to
consider this. Seven days pass and Michelle makes no contact regarding the claimant commitment. The
DM decides that in respect of the claim for UC made on 20.5.13, Michelle is not entitled. This is because a
claimant commitment has not been accepted.




J1012 Where an award of UC may be made


1. without the claimant making a claim and


2. where the claimant commitment has been accepted by the claimant within the time specified by the
Secretary of State


the claimant commitment is treated as having been accepted on the first day of the first assessment

period of that award1.


Note: ADM Chapter A2 provides guidance on circumstances where an award of UC can be made without
a claim being required.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 15(2)


Example
Madelene was entitled to UC but her award came to an end when her income exceeded the prescribed
minimum. Two months later, Madelene’s income drops so that she would be entitled to UC again. An
award of UC is made without the requirement for Madelene to make a new claim. Madelene is required to
accept a new claimant commitment in respect of this latest award of UC. This claimant commitment
takes effect from the first day of the assessment period of the latest award of UC. Madelene therefore
satisfies that condition of entitlement for UC and her award of UC will begin from the first day of that
assessment period.




J1013 – J1014




Extending the period of time to accept the claimant commitment

J1015 The period of time within which a person is required to accept


1. a claimant commitment or


2. an updated claimant commitment


can be extended.




J1016 The extended period of time applies where the claimant has requested that the Secretary of State
review


1. any action proposed as


      1.1 a work search requirement or


      1.2 a work availability requirement or


2. whether any limitation should apply to


      2.1 a work search requirement or


      2.2 a work availability requirement


so long as the Secretary of State considers the request is reasonable 1.


                                                                                        1 UC Regs, reg 15(3)


J1017 – J1019
Exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant commitment
J1020 - J1029

Exceptions to the requirement to accept the claimant commitment

J1020 A claimant is not required to meet the basic condition of entitlement of having to accept a

claimant commitment if1


1. they lack capacity to do so (see J1021) or


2. exceptional conditions apply and it would be unreasonable to expect the claimant to accept one (see
J1024) or


3. they are terminally ill (see J1027).


                                                                                           UC Regs, reg 16


Lacking capacity
J1021 A claimant does not have to meet the basic condition of accepting a claimant commitment where

they lack the capacity to do so1.


Note: Where it is accepted that a claimant lacks capacity then the requirement to accept a claimant
commitment is lifted. Each individual case is considered on its own facts, circumstances and evidence in
consideration of whether the claimant lacks capacity to accept a claimant commitment.


                                                                                    1 UC Regs, reg 16 (1)(a)


Appointee in place
J1022 If the claimant has an appointee in place this would usually indicate that the claimant lacks the
capacity to accept a claimant commitment. The decision to waive the requirement to accept a claimant
commitment must be considered on a case-by-case basis by the work coach but in most cases where
the claimant has an appointee, the requirement will be waived.


J1023 Some claimants with an appointee in place may wish to do voluntary work-related activity (see
further guidance in ADM Chapter J3) but the requirement to accept a claimant commitment would be
waived. An appointee is not required to accept a claimant commitment on the claimant’s behalf and
should not be asked to do so. However, the claimant, appointee and work coach can agree voluntary
work-related activities together.


Example 1


Fiona has severe learning disabilities. She has made a claim to UC with an appointee completing the
claim on Fiona’s behalf. After a discussion with the appointee, Fiona’s work coach at the Jobcentre
decides that Fiona is not required to accept a claimant commitment because her learning disabilities
mean that Fiona cannot understand the expectations or requirements in connection with a claim to UC.
The requirement to accept a claimant commitment is waived.


Example 2


David makes a claim for UC with the help of his neighbour. The neighbour isn’t David’s appointee but is
helping him with the claiming process. During the new claim interview with his work coach, it becomes
apparent that David does not understand what is required of him with regards to entitlement to UC. The
adviser decides that David should be referred for appointee action. An appointee is later authorised to
act on David’s behalf. David is not required to accept a claimant commitment.



Example 3


Donald has learning difficulties and has an appointee in place. He lives in supported accommodation and
is unable to manage his financial affairs. Although Donald has an appointee he is able to engage with a
work coach and undertake some appropriate voluntary work-related activity. Donald is not considered
to have the capacity to accept his claimant commitment and will not be expected to do so.




Exceptional circumstances
J1024 The claimant is not required to accept a claimant commitment where 1


1. exceptional circumstances apply and


2. it would be unreasonable to expect the claimant to accept a claimant commitment.


Note: Reasonable means fair and sensible in the circumstances. It would be for the DM to consider each
case on it's own individual merits, facts and circumstances when considering whether exceptional
conditions apply as per J1024 2. and whether it would be unreasonable.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 16(1)(b)



J1025 Examples of when exceptional circumstances apply may include where


1. the claimant is incapacitated in hospital and is likely to be there for a considerable time


2. the Jobcentre is closed due to an emergency, for example, a fire or a flood


3. there is a domestic emergency preventing the claimant from accepting the claimant commitment 1.
This list is not exhaustive. When determining whether or not exceptional circumstances apply, the DM
should remember that the normal everyday meaning of “exceptional” is “unusual, not typical”. Each case
would be considered on its own individual merits, facts, circumstances and evidence and whether it was
reasonable on the balance of probabilities.


Note: Once the exceptional circumstances have passed then the claimant will be required to accept a
claimant commitment as normal.




                                                                                          1 UC Regs, reg 2



J1026 The DM has to take into account the circumstances of each individual case in deciding whether it
is also unreasonable to expect the claimant to accept the claimant commitment.


Note: Reasonable means fair and sensible in the circumstances. It would be for the DM to consider each
case on its own individual merits, facts and circumstances when considering whether exceptional
conditions apply and whether it would be unreasonable to expect the claimant to do so at the relevant
time. For full and extensive guidance on what to consider when considering whether the circumstances
are reasonable or not see the guidance on the principles of good reason in ADM Chapter K2.


Example 1


Nina made a claim to UC but due to a fire at the Jobcentre was unable to attend the meeting with her
adviser to accept her claimant commitment. The DM treated Nina as having accepted her claimant
commitment and so Nina became entitled to UC. Now that the Jobcentre is re-opened, Nina is sent new
appointment details to accept her claimant commitment.


Example 2


Rose has made a claim to UC. On the day that she is due to meet her adviser to accept her claimant
commitment she is, at short notice, given an appointment at her hospital to have a long awaited
operation. Rose is expected to be in hospital for some time but is unsure for exactly how long at this
stage. It would be unreasonable to expect Rose to cancel her operation in order to accept her claimant
commitment. Once she has been discharged from hospital, another appointment can be booked with
her to accept her claimant commitment.


Example 3


Kevin has made a claim to UC. On the day that he is due to accept his claimant commitment, he phones
the Jobcentre to say that he cannot attend the interview in person because his boiler has broken and an
engineer is due to fix it that day so he has got water and heating. The work coach asks Kevin to accept
his claimant commitment by telephone appointment at a convenient time on that day so he can also be
at home for the engineer to fix his boiler.




Terminally ill
J1027 Terminally ill means


1. that the claimant is suffering from a progressive disease and


2. that death in consequence of that disease can reasonably be expected within 12 months1.


Note: Legislation uses the terminology 'terminally ill' but for operational purposes and communications
the term 'end of life' is used. DMs may see reference to either terminology but both have the same
meaning as defined in J1027.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 2




J1028 A claimant will not have to meet the basic condition of entitlement to have accepted a claimant

commitment to be entitled to UC if the person is terminally ill1 as per J1027.



                                                                                    1 UC Regs, reg 16(2)


J1029
Reviewing the claimant commitment J1030 - J1999

Reviewing the claimant commitment

J1030 A claimant commitment can be reviewed and updated at such time as the Secretary of State sees
fit1.


                                                                                       1 WR Act 12, s 14(2)


Note: It is important that the claimant commitment should be reviewed and revised on a regular basis to
ensure it is up to date and accurately reflects the work-related requirements that are appropriate to the
claimant's current individual circumstances and the local jobs market supporting obtaining paid work
(more or better-paid work). A claimant’s circumstances can change suddenly and frequently and a
requirement that was reasonable at the time they entered into their claimant commitment may no longer
be reasonable. Any changes in circumstances must be dealt with promptly to reflect any new or changed
requirements in light of considering emerging claimant needs and fluctuating individual and local
circumstances including, for example, coronavirus related restrictions.




J1031 Where a claimant commitment has been reviewed and updated then the claimant is required

to accept it as the most up to date version to retain entitlement to UC 1.


Note 1: A claimant accepts a claimant commitment if, and only if, the claimant accepts the most up-to-
date version of it in such manner as may be prescribed.


Note 2: It is important to be clear about the stage of the claimant’s UC journey that is being considered in
each individual case. Where specifically the claimant has been required to attend an interview where the
revised claimant commitment would be drawn up for acceptance, only a sanctionable failure could be
considered where the claimant fails to comply with the interview requirement because the previous
claimant commitment would remain in place until the updated or revised commitments have been

created and offered for acceptance2 (see Note 3). However, where the scenario is that a revised
claimant commitment is prepared and the claimant is properly advised that the revised claimant
commitment must be accepted and of the consequence of not accepting it, a decision can be made to
terminate the award on the basis that the claimant no longer meets the requirements to have accepted
the most up to date version. See further guidance at J1032 to J1036.


Note 3: Reliance on the case law2 is restricted to scenarios where the claimant has failed to attend an
appointment and should not be relied on in scenarios where the claimant commitment has been revised,
offered for acceptance and the claimant has been properly notified of the requirement to accept it and
the consequences if not. In such cases if the claimant fails or refuses to accept the new commitments by
the deadline set the decision maker will end the award.
                                                                                          1 WR Act 12 s14(5);
                                                                  2 FO vs SSWP (UC) [2022] UKUT 56 (AAC)




Participating in an interview to review commitments

J1032 To update and set new commitments may require the claimant to participate in an interview to
discuss, draw up and accept the revised commitments.


Note 1: If J1032 applies, until the claimant takes part in an interview to draw up and accept new
commitments the previous claimant commitment would remain in place until the updated or revised
commitments have been created.


Note 2: If the claimant fails to take part in (including attend) the interview, the DM will consider a sanction
(see J1034). If the claimant takes part in the interview but fails or refuses to accept the
new commitments, a cooling off period (usually 7days) will be set for the claimant to reconsider (see
J1033). If by the end of the cooling off period the new commitments have not been accepted then the UC
award will end.


Note 3: It will be crucial that the claimant is fully aware of what is expected of them and the
consequences of failing to comply see Note 2. in line with the public law principles of fairness (see ADM
K1151 et seq for further guidance).


Example
Waasif is in receipt of UC and is in the NWRR group. His joint claim partner, Fajar, has a current claimant
commitment based on her caring responsibilities for their 2 children. Due to a change in the youngest
child’s age, new commitments are required. Fajar is asked to take part in an interview to set new
commitments based on the change. Fajar fails to attend the interview. The decision maker considers
whether a sanction applies.
Fajar makes contact and a new interview date is set.
Fajar attends the interview and new commitments are drawn up. These are placed in the journal with a
7day deadline to accept them and a warning that if Fajar does not accept the commitments by the
deadline the award of UC will end.


J1033 A ‘cooling off’ period (see J1009) can apply when a claimant commitment is reviewed. During this
period the claimant commitment previously accepted remains in place and the claimant will be expected
to comply with any work-related requirements accepted as part of that, unless to do so would be
unreasonable in the individual circumstances. For guidance on what to consider when deciding what may
be unreasonable see the guidance on good reason in ADM Chapter K2.


Note: If the claimant has failed or refused to accept the new commitments at the end of the cooling off
period the DM will end the award of UC.
Example


Rory is in receipt of UC. He has no work and has failed to find any since losing his job in retail prior to his
claim for UC. Rory has worked in retail for all of his working life. Rory’s claimant commitment includes his
work search requirements which are mainly focused on looking for work in the retail sector. Rory’s work
coach decides that Rory’s work search should be broadened to include work other than just retail work.
Rory’s claimant commitment needs updating to reflect this wider work search requirement.


Rory is required to participate in an interview to discuss and accept updated commitments.
If Rory fails to attend the interview the DM will consider a sanction.


If Rory attends the interview and new commitments are prepared, but he fails or refuses to accept the
new commitments, the DM will set a cooling off period of 7 days and if Rory has still not accepted the
new commitments at the end of the cooling off period, the UC award will end.



Change in conditionality group

J1034 When there is a change of circumstances that means a claimant moves between conditionality
groups, they will be required to accept a revised claimant commitment to reflect their new
circumstances. Changes in circumstances are taken into account immediately for conditionality
purposes and the conditionality group is changed when the change of circumstances is notified.
Claimants (and their partners) must always be placed in the correct group. They must



      1. know exactly what they are expected to do in return for UC and



      2. have an up-to-date claimant commitment which reflects their current individual circumstances.


Note 1: A change in conditionality group may require the claimant to take part in a commitments review
interview (see J1035) or in some circumstances new commitments may be automatically generated by
the UC system and placed in the journal for acceptance (see J1036).


Note 2: It is important claimants are made aware of any change promptly including any consequences of
sanctions or of the award ending that are appropriate, so they can continue to meet their conditionality
requirements and understand the consequences if they fail to comply.



 Taking part in an interview to set new commitments

J1035 Where a claimant commitment is to be reviewed due to a change in circumstances, taking part in
an interview can be set as a requirement for the claimant even if taking part in an interview is not

included on the current claimant commitment1. The claimant must be separately and correctly informed
of the date, time and place of the appointment, the reasons for the interview and the consequences of
failing to take part in that appointment.


Note 1: Requirements can be set outside of the claimant commitment, if it is reasonable to do so, by
requiring participation in an interview to set the new requirements (see further guidance in ADM Chapter
K5321 et seq). If the claimant is required to take part in an interview to set new requirements, there is no
legal basis to consider ending the award of UC for not having a new claimant commitment since the
previous claimant commitment still applies (see J1031 and J1032 Note 1.). Any failure to comply with
a requirement to participate in a commitments review for no good reason, e.g. they fail to attend the
interview, is a sanctionable failure and not reason to suspend or terminate the award of UC. The guidance
on low-level sanctions in ADM Chapter K5 will apply.


Note 2: Only if the claimant attends the interview as required and new commitments are drawn up and
offered for acceptance but they refuse or fail to accept the new commitments can the DM consider
terminating the award of UC after a cooling off period (see J1010 and J1032).


                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s14(2); WR Act 12, s23


Auto-generated claimant commitments

J1036 In some cases the UC system produces a new claimant commitment when a change of
circumstances automatically applies. In such a case the DM does not normally require the claimant to
take part in an interview. The revised claimant commitment is placed into the claimant’s journal with an
instruction to accept the revised commitments within 7 days and with a warning that if the commitments
are not accepted within that 7day period the award of UC will end.


Note: In every case the Secretary of State must be able to demonstrate that it was made absolutely clear
to the claimant that the new commitments must be accepted within a certain time scale (usually 7 days)
and the consequence of not accepting the revised claimant commitment would be that the award of UC
would end.


Example 1


Katie is in receipt of UC and has a daughter whose 1st birthday is on 14.2.21. This means Katie will be
moved from the no work-related requirements group into the WFI only group from 14.2.21 and a new
claimant commitment will be required to reflect the new work-related group.
The UC system automatically generates a new claimant commitment to reflect the change of
circumstances. This is placed in Katie’s journal with an instruction to accept the new commitments within
7 days with a warning that if she does not, the award of UC will end.


Example 2


Boris is in the no work-related requirements group as his earnings exceed his individual threshold, with
an appropriate claimant commitment in place to reflect his circumstances. The company that Boris
works for is downsized with the result that Boris' hours of work are reduced to a level that now bring his
earnings below his individual threshold and move him into the all work-related requirements group.
A new claimant commitment is placed in Boris’ journal with the instruction to accept the new
commitments within 7 days with the consequence that if he fails to do so the award of UC will end.


J1037 - J1999
