ADM Chapter P2: Assessment for PIP



Limited and severely limited ability P2002-P2018


Information requirements P2026-P2028


Assessment consultations P2046-P2049




Daily living and mobility components

P2001 The activities to satisfy the Daily Living and/or Mobility components are prescribed 1. These can
be found in the Appendices to this Chapter.


                                                                                      1 SS (PIP) Regs, Sch 1



Limited and severely limited ability

P2002 Entitlement to PIP is based on whether a claimant has limited or severely limited ability to carry

out daily living and/or mobility activities1. This will be determined by a DM using the information gathered
during the PIP assessment (see P2004 – P2006).


                                                                                      1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 4


P2003 In addition the required period condition, consisting of


1. the qualifying period of 3 months and


2. the prospective test of 9 months


has to be satisfied1. The HP will advise the DM if these conditions are likely to have been met (see P1031).


                                                                                 1 SS (PIP) Reg, reg 12 & 13


P2004 The PIP assessment is used to determine a claimant’s ability to carry out


1. daily living activities or


2. mobility activities or


3. a mixture of both.
P2005 The assessment will determine whether a claimant’s ability is limited or severely limited by their

physical or mental condition, and if the claimant meets the required period condition 1 (see ADM Chapter
P1 - Conditions of Entitlement).


                                                                          1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 4 & reg 12 to 15


P2006 The assessment will be in the form of either1


1. a face-to-face consultation or


2. a telephone consultation or


3. a paper based assessment or


4. a video consultation or


5. fast track if under the special rules for terminally ill persons or


6. a combination of any of 1. – 5.


Once all the evidence is gathered the DM will also assess the claimant using the same criteria as the HP.
The DM at this point may also ask the HP for additional information if required, to help the DM make their
decision.


                                                                                       1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 9(1)


P2007 The HP is specially trained to assess and evaluate the impact of disability on a claimant’s ability to
carry out activities of daily living and mobility. This includes the affects of variable conditions.


P2008 The HP has appropriate knowledge of clinical aspects of a wide range of medical conditions and
is skilled in assessing people with physical and mental health conditions.


P2009 A HP will be one of the following


1. An occupational therapist


2. Nurse (level 1)


3. Physiotherapist


4. Paramedic


5. Doctor (GMC registered)


P2010 The HP provides advice to the DM on the limitation to carry out daily living and/or mobility
activities and advises on which descriptors are appropriate for the claimant. The advice the HP provides
is based on the daily living/mobility needs arising from a condition or conditions and not the condition(s)
itself.


P2011 The claimant will be assessed as having limited ability if the daily living activities or mobility

activities achieve a score of at least 8 points1 in each component. This will then lead to an award of the
relevant component or components at the standard rate of PIP (see P2014).


                                                                          1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 5(3)(a); reg 6(3)(a)


P2012 The claimant will be assessed as having severely limited ability if the daily living activities or

mobility activities achieve a score of at least 12 points 1 in each component. This will then lead to an award
of the relevant component or components at the enhanced rate of PIP (see P2014).


                                                                         1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 5(3)(b ): reg 6(3)(b)


P2013 The score in relation to the daily living and mobility activities is determined 1 by adding together, in
relation to each activity, the points awarded against the selected descriptors.


                                                                                1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 5(1); reg 6(1)


P2014 The applicable descriptor for the claimant for each activity is


1. where one descriptor is satisfied for over 50% of the days, that descriptor 1 or


2. where two or more descriptors are satisfied for over 50% of the days, the descriptor which scores the

highest number of points2 or


3. where no descriptor is satisfied for over 50% of the days but two or more scoring descriptors are
satisfied for periods of more than 50% of the days when added together, the descriptor to be applied is
the one which


          3.1 is satisfied for the greatest proportion of the days or


          3.2 scores the higher or highest number of points where both or all descriptors are satisfied for the

          same period3.


                                                                1 PIP Regs, reg 7(1)(a); 2 reg 7(1)(b); 3 reg 7(1)(c)


Example 1


Phil has long term problems with rheumatoid arthritis and has very limited walking ability. He needs to
use a wheelchair for more than 50% of the days when outdoors, and can only walk a few metres before
being in pain and discomfort. He is assessed as


          “Can stand and move more than 1 metre but no more than 20 metres, either aided or unaided”
and scores 12 points on the assessment. He is therefore awarded the enhanced rate of the PIP mobility
component.




Example 2


Mary has learning difficulties and


      “Needs supervision or assistance to either prepare or cook a simple meal” - scoring 4 points.


      “Needs supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to manage therapy that takes no more
      than 3.5 hours a week” - scoring 2 points.


      “Needs supervision or prompting to be able to wash or bathe” – scoring 2 points.


      “Cannot read or understand signs, symbols or words at all” – scoring 8 points.


      “Cannot make any budgeting decisions at all – scoring 6 points.


      “Cannot plan the route of a journey” – scoring 8 points.


Mary is therefore awarded the daily living component at the enhanced rate as she has scored 22 points,
and the mobility component at the standard rate as she has scored 8 points.




Example 3


John has arthritis in his hands and for approximately 1 to 2 weeks a month he cannot


      “Cannot prepare and cook food” which would score 8 points.


He also has Multiple Sclerosis which is not controlled well and for about 16 weeks of the year, which do
not overlap with the arthritis, he


      “Needs supervision or assistance to either prepare or cook a simple meal” which would score 4
      points.


Neither descriptor is satisfied for more than 50% of the time on their own, but in aggregate cover more
than 50% of the time. John is awarded the standard rate of the daily living component as the descriptor
awarding 8 points applies for the greatest amount of the time.




P2015 When assessing the claimant’s ability to carry out an activity, the claimant is to be assessed as if
wearing or using any aid or appliance1 which


1. the claimant normally wears or uses or


2. the claimant could reasonably be expected to wear or use.


                                                                             1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 4(2)(a) & (b)


(See PIP The Meaning of “Safely”) P2016 The descriptor will only be regarded as being satisfied if the
claimant can be assessed as carrying out that activity, in the manner described in the descriptor


1. safely – which means in a manner unlikely to cause harm to themselves or to another person, either
during or after completion of the activity and


2. to an acceptable standard – given the nature of the activity and


3. repeatedly – which means as often as the activity being assessed is reasonably required to be
completed and


4. in a reasonable time period1- which means no more than twice as long as the maximum period that a
person without a physical or mental condition, which limits that person’s ability to carry out the activity in
question, would normally take to complete that activity.


                                                                                 1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 4(2A)(d)


P2017 In determining whether the activity can be carried out in this manner, consideration should be
given to


1. approach – what the individual needs to do; what assistance or aids are required; how long it takes; and
whether it is safe and


2. outcome – whether the activity can be successfully completed and the standard that is achieved and


3. impact – the effects that reaching the outcome has on the individual and, where relevant, other people;
and whether the individual can repeat the activity within a reasonable period of time and to the same
standard (this includes consideration of symptoms such as pain, discomfort, breathlessness, fatigue and
anxiety) and


4. variability – how an individual’s approach and outcomes change over time and the impact this has on
them.


Example 1


Henry is able to stand and move unaided. He can comfortably walk up to 150 metres at a normal pace.
After 150 metres he starts to become breathless and to experience some mild pain. He can continue to
walk but his pace slows. The pain and breathlessness gradually increases and after 250 metres he needs
to stop and rest for about 5 minutes before starting to walk again. Henry can repeatedly walk 250
metres, with short 5-minute rests in between for around an hour. After an hour of this, he needs a longer
rest of about an hour before walking again. It takes Henry around four minutes to walk 200 metres. The
DM considers whether Henry can stand and then move more than 200 metres (descriptor 2a) safely, to
an acceptable standard, repeatedly and a in a timely manner. The DM decides there is no evidence that
this activity poses any risk to Henry’s safety; he has said he experiences some pain and breathlessness
and, while this may be uncomfortable, he knows when to stop and rest and there is no indication that this
causes him any harm. The DM decides Henry can complete the activity more frequently than would
reasonably be expected and, although he takes a little longer than a non-disabled person, he can
complete the activity in a reasonable time period. As Henry can therefore stand and then move more
than 200 metres safely, repeatedly and in a timely manner (the standard is not an issue in this instance),
the DM selects descriptor 2a.


Example 2


Louise is able to stand and move with a walking stick. She can walk up to 50 metres at a slightly slowed
pace with some discomfort. After this distance she starts to experience increasing hip pain. She can
continue to walk, but her pace slows even further and after 100 metres she needs to stop and rest. This
takes a lot out of her and for a few hours after Louise is unable to go more than a few steps without
experiencing further severe hip pain. The DM considers whether Louise can stand and then move more
than 50 metres but no more than 200 metres (descriptor 2b) safely, to an acceptable standard,
repeatedly, and in a timely manner. The DM decides that there is no issue with the standard and that she
can do so safely, because, although she experiences pain, she knows when to stop and rest, and there is
no indication that this causes her any harm. However, after she has walked 100 metres, it is several hours
before Louise can walk this distance again. The DM decides this is less frequently than would be
reasonably expected and therefore concludes she cannot do so repeatedly. Louise can repeatedly
manage a few metres using her stick, which is less than 20 metres but more than 1 metre (descriptor 2e).
On this evidence the DM selects descriptor 2e.


Example 3


Julie can prepare and cook a simple meal. However she lacks a perception of danger and occasionally
cuts herself from mishandling knives or burns herself on hot pans. She is also impatient and does not
cook food for as long as it should be cooked, as a result she prepares food that is lukewarm and meat
that is not cooked properly – for example, chicken that is pink in the middle. Her sister usually has to be in
the kitchen when she is cooking meals to make sure she does so safely and to remind her to leave food
to cook fully. The DM considers whether Julie can prepare and cook a simple meal unaided (descriptor
1a), safely, to an acceptable standard, repeatedly and in a timely manner. The DM decides Julie is able to
do so repeatedly and in a timely manner. Because she lacks a perception of danger, the DM decides Julie
needs supervision to be able to safely prepare or cook a simple meal (descriptor 1e). Because she does
not cook food for as long as she should, the DM decides Julie needs prompting to prepare or cook a
simple meal (descriptor 1d) to an acceptable standard. In this case there are two possible descriptors – 1d
and 1e, but as descriptor 1d does not describe a manner in which Julie is able to carry out the activity
safely, the DM selects descriptor 1e.


P2018 Where the claimant is assessed as having severely limited ability to carry out the daily living
and/or mobility activities, they cannot also be assessed as having limited ability in relation to that

component1.


                                                                                      1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 4(3)


P2019 – P2025



Information requirements

P2026 The claimant will be required to provide any information or evidence 1 that may be requested by
the DM to determine their ability to undertake either the daily living or mobility activities specified.


                                                                                       1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 8(1)


P2027 The information will take the form of


1. the claimant questionnaire, (How your disability affects you), if required


2. any other information as may be requested by the DM


3. any other additional information requested by a person approved by the Secretary of State (e.g. a HP
requesting further information by telephone).


P2028 Where information has been requested of the claimant, that information must be provided within

1 month1 of the request, or any longer period as the DM may consider reasonable.


Note: See P2056 for guidance where a claimant fails to comply with providing information or evidence.


                                                                                        1 SS (PIP) Reg, reg 8(2)


P2029 – P2045



Assessment consultations

P2046 If it is decided that a consultation 1 with the claimant is required to assess the claimant’s ability to

undertake daily living and/or mobility activities the consultation 1 will take the form of participation in a
face-to-face consultation (but see P2006, a consultation by telephone may be used to gather further
information).


Note: A paper based assessment may be available for some claimants, and may be made where there is
sufficient evidence for the HP to advise on all aspects of the claim.
                                                                                  1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 9(1)


P2047 The claimant will be required to comply with the request to attend for a consultation. Failure to

comply will result in the DM giving a negative determination1, unless the claimant shows good reason2
not to participate in the consultation (see P2058).


Note: See P2056 for guidance where a claimant fails to comply with a request to attend a consultation
and guidance at P2058 and ADM Chapter P6 for guidance on good reason.


                                                                         1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 9(2); 2 reg 10


P2048 The claimant must be notified in writing1 of the


1. date and


2. time and


3. place


of the consultation at least 7 days in advance.


Note: The claimant can agree to accept a shorter period of notice, whether given in writing or otherwise.


                                                                                  1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 9(3)


P2049 The written notice may be issued electronically1 where the claimant has agreed to
correspondence being sent in this manner.


Note This facility will not be available until a future date.


                                                                                  1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 9(4)


P2050 – P2055




Subpages

    • Failure to comply P2056-P2058
• Duration of award P2061-P2065
• Re-determination P2066-P2068
• Terminal illness P2076-P2080
• Appendix 1 - Definitions and Descriptors
• Appendix 2 - UT and Court decisions
Failure to comply P2056-P2058



P2056 Failure to comply with the request


1. to provide information or


2. attend a consultation


without good reason shall result in a negative determination 1 of the component(s) to which the failure is
related.


Note: For guidance on good reason see P2058 and ADM Chapter P6 – Good Reason.


                                                                             1 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 8(3) & 9(2)


P2057 A negative determination1 means a determination that a person does not meet the requirements
of the daily living component or the mobility component.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 80(6)


Example


Amanda made a telephone claim to PIP and was sent out a part 2 questionnaire, ‘How does your
disability affect you’. She was asked to return the form within one month of the date of the request. After
19 days she had not returned the form so she was sent a postal reminder but she also failed to respond
to this. As she did not comply with returning the information required, and she hadn't been identified as
needing additional support, a negative determination was made on her claim.


Good reason
P2058 Claimants will have had the opportunity to explain why they have not complied with a request to


1. provide information or


2. attend a consultation.


It will remain the claimant’s responsibility to show good reason and provide any evidence to justify their
good reason. The DM will make a decision based on all the individual facts and circumstance of the case
and taking into account in particular the claimant’s state of health at the relevant time and the nature of
their disability.


Note: For further guidance on good reason see ADM Chapter P6 - Good reason.


P2059 – P2060
Duration of award P2061-P2065



P2061 Awards for PIP are by default to be for a fixed term 1. There are exceptions to this, where it is
considered that such a period would be inappropriate.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 88(2)


P2062 Where following an assessment consultation, it is considered that the claimant has


1. a level of functional ability which is not likely to change in the long-term or


2. high levels of functional impairment which are only likely to increase


a fixed term award will be inappropriate and an on-going award with a PIP Award Review date after 10
years will be applicable.


Note: This is the guidance issued by the Secretary of State in accordance with legislation 1.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 88(3)


P2063 When deciding the duration of a fixed term award1 of PIP the DM should look at all the evidence
and facts of the case, including the advice from the HP. There will be two types of fixed term awards


1. short fixed term awards, which will be for a minimum of 9 months and a maximum of 2 years or


2. longer fixed term awards, where the DM will set an expiry date 12 months after the date on which the
claimant is due to be referred to the HP for a review


Note: DMs will also have a role in deciding the PIP Award Review date which will be detailed in the DM’s
procedural guidance.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 88(2)


P2064 When deciding the length of the award the DM will have regard to


1. the advice from the HP, within the PIP assessment report and


2. any further evidence gathered by the HP and


3. the evidence given by the claimant in the questionnaire (How your disability affects you), and any
additional information supplied by the claimant.


Note: DMs should refer to the procedural guidance on Award Periods and Reviews (within the Decision
Making Process Guidance), when deciding the length of the award and setting review periods.
P2065 The advice on prognosis from the HP advising when they wish to see the claimant again in
accordance with P2066 – P2067, will have had consideration as to


1. whether there is likely to be an improvement or deterioration in the disability or its functional effects
and


2. whether further treatment is required and


3. the time any improvement or deterioration is likely to be expected and


4. the natural progress of the underlying condition and


5. any adjustments and adaptations.


Example 1


Joan sent in her questionnaire for her claim to PIP and attended for a consultation with an HP. On the
evidence before them the HP provided a report to the DM for their consideration, with a
recommendation that the claim should be reviewed in 3 years. This took into account the likely prognosis
by the HP of improvement in Joan’s disability condition and the daily living/mobility needs arising. The
DM considered all the evidence and made their decision on the length of the award, decided on a PIP
Award Review date of 3 years and an award for PIP of 4 years. This ensures that the award does not run
out before the new decision is made.


Example 2


Richard submitted his questionnaire in relation to his claim for PIP, and the HP considered the
information and called him for a consultation. At the consultation Richard brought a letter from his GP
and handed it to the HP. The HP looked at all the evidence, including the consultation, and advised that
Richard’s claim should be reviewed after two years. The DM considered all the evidence and decided that
a formal review would not be appropriate, and made an award of PIP for two years, as it is expected that
he will have improved by the end of the award. Richard will receive a letter before the end of his award to
advise him about claiming again, should his needs not have improved.


Example 3


Agnes has had a long term disability and made a claim for PIP. She submitted her questionnaire, and the
HP decided to seek further advice from her hospital consultant. On this evidence the HP made an
assessment and advised the DM that Agnes’ prognosis was that her needs would be unlikely to change.
On this evidence from the HP the DM made a decision to make an ongoing award for PIP, with a PIP
Award Review date after 10 years, to check if the level of benefit is still appropriate.
Re-determination P2066-P2068



P2066 [See ADM Memo 06-26] Where a claimant has been determined to have a limited or severely

limited ability to carry out activities, the DM may re-determine 1 whether a claimant still has limited or
severely limited ability to carry out the required activities.


                                                                                        1 SS(PIP) Regs, reg 11


P2067 The re-determination can be performed when


1. a period of award is coming to an end or


2. a claimant reports a change of circumstances or


3. the DM wishes to review the claimant’s award, at any time or for any reason (except for the reason at
P2068).


P2068 Doing work for payment or in expectation of payment, or doing voluntary work, is not a reason for

a fresh determination1. However, this does not preclude a DM from reassessing entitlement for other
reasons (for example, a change in condition, improvement in functional ability or suspected fraud) which
could be indicated by undertaking work of a particular nature.


Note: This provision does not enable the award to be changed. In order to change the award a
supersession decision is required, see ADM Chapter A4.


                                                                                     1 SS(PIP) Regs, reg 11(2)


P2069 – P2075
Terminal illness P2076-P2080



P2076 There are exceptions to the normal rules when the person who claims


1. is terminally ill and


2. has made a claim for PIP expressly on the ground of terminal illness1.


Note: Evidence from or on behalf of the disabled person of terminal illness will amend the claim to one
based on the Special Rules (see P2079).


                                                                                           1 WR Act 12, s 82


P2077 A person is regarded as being terminally ill1 for the purposes of P2076 if


1. at any time the person suffers from a progressive disease and


2. the person’s death in consequence of that disease can reasonably be expected within 12 months.


                                                                                         1 WR Act 12, s 82(4)


P2078 When a claim is made under the circumstances in P2076 the claimant will


1. not be required to satisfy the required period condition for either component 1 and


2. not be required to satisfy the past presence condition2 and


3. be awarded the enhanced rate of the daily living component 3 and


4. be required to provide information on the mobility activities before either rate of that component can
be awarded.


                                    1 WR Act 12, s 82(2) & (3); 2 SS (PIP) Regs, reg 22; 3 WR Act 12, s 82(2)


P2079 Claims for terminally ill people will usually be awarded for and limited to 3 years. A reminder will
be issued before the award expires to remind the claimant to re-claim PIP.


Third party claims
P2080 A claim may be accepted from a third party1 if the claim is made expressly on the ground that this
is on behalf of someone who is terminally ill. This has the effect that the terminally ill person has made
the claim (see ADM Chapter A2 - claims).
                1 WR Act 12, s 82(5); SS (PIP) Regs, reg 21


P2081 – P2999
Appendix 1 - Definitions and Descriptors



PERSONAL INDEPENDENCE PAYMENT ASSESSMENT

This Appendix gives the definitions of terms used in the regulations and schedule and the list of
descriptors.




Aided


means with


1. the use of an aid or appliance or


2. supervision, prompting or assistance.


Assistance


means physical intervention by another person and does not include speech.


Assistance Dog


means a dog trained to guide or assist a person with a sensory impairment.


Basic verbal information


means information in the claimant’s native language conveyed in a simple sentence.


Basic written information


means signs, symbols and dates written or printed in the claimant’s native language.


Bathe


includes getting into or out of an unadapted bath or shower.


Communication support


means support from a person trained or experienced in communicating with people with specific
communication needs including interpreting verbal information into a non-verbal form and vice versa.


Complex budgeting decisions
means decisions involving


1. calculating household and personal budgets and


2. managing and paying bills and


planning future purchases


Complex verbal information


means information in the claimant’s native language conveyed in either more than one sentence or one
complicated sentence.


Complex written information


means more than one sentence of written or printed standard size text in the claimant’s native language.


Cook


means to heat food at or above waist height.


Dress and undress


includes putting on and taking off socks and shoes.


Engage socially


means


1. interact with others in a contextually and socially appropriate manner and


2. understand body language and


3. establish relationships.


Manage incontinence


means manage involuntary evacuation of the bowel or bladder including use of a collecting device or
self-catheterisation and clean oneself afterwards.


Manage medication or therapy


means take medication or undertake therapy, where a failure to do so is likely to result in a deterioration
in the claimant’s health.


Medication
means medication to be taken at home which is prescribed or recommended by a registered


1. doctor


2. nurse or


3. pharmacist.


Monitor health


means


1. detect significant changes in the claimant’s condition which are likely to lead to a deterioration in their
health and


2. take action advised by a


       2.1 registered doctor


       2.2 registered nurse or


       2.3 health professional who is regulated by the Health Professions Council


without which the claimant’s health is likely to deteriorate.


Orientation aid


19 Orientation aid means a specialist aid designed to assist disabled people to follow a route safely.


Prepare


In the context of food prepare means to make food ready for cooking or eating.


Prompting


means reminding, encouraging or explaining by another person.


Psychological distress


means distress related to an enduring mental health condition or an intellectual or cognitive impairment.


Read


includes reading signs, symbols and words but does not include reading Braille.


Simple budgeting decisions
means decisions involving


1. calculating the cost of goods and


2. calculating change required after a purchase.


Simple Meal


means a cooked one-course meal for one using fresh ingredients.


Social Support


means support from a person trained or experienced in assisting people to engage in social situations.


Stand


means stand upright with at least one biological foot on the ground.


Supervision


means the continuous presence of another person for the purpose of ensuring the claimant’s safety.


Take nutrition


means


1. to cut food into pieces and


2. convey food or drink to one’s mouth and


3. chew and swallow food or drink or


4. take nutrition by using a therapeutic source.


Therapeutic source


means parenteral or enteral tube feeding, using a rate limiting device such as a delivery system or feed
pump.


Therapy


means therapy to be undertaken at home which is prescribed or recommended by a


1. registered


2. health professional regulated by the Health Professions Council.
      1.1 doctor


      1.2 nurse or


      1.3 pharmacist


Toilet needs


means


1. getting on and off an unadapted toilet and


2. evacuating the bladder and bowel and


3. cleaning oneself afterwards.


Unaided


means without


1. the use of an aid or appliance or


2. supervision, prompting or assistance.




Daily living and mobility activities

Note: See P2011- P2014


Daily Living Activities


Column 1                          Column 2                                                   Column
                                                                                             3
Activity                          Descriptors
                                                                                             Points


1. Preparing food.                a. Can prepare and cook a simple meal unaided.             0


                                  b. Needs to use an aid or appliance to be able to either   2
                                  prepare or cook a simple meal.
                         c. Cannot cook a simple meal using a conventional cooker          2
                         but is able to do so using a microwave.


                         d. Needs prompting to be able to either prepare or cook a         2
                         simple meal.


                         e. Needs supervision or assistance to either prepare or cook 4
                         a simple meal.


                         f. Cannot prepare and cook food.                                  8


2. Taking nutrition.     a. Can take nutrition unaided.                                    0


                         b. Needs –                                                        2


                         (i) to use an aid or appliance to be able to take nutrition; or


                         (ii) supervision to be able to take nutrition; or


                         (ii) assistance to be able to cut up food.


                         c. Needs a therapeutic source to be able to take nutrition.       2


                         d. Needs prompting to be able to take nutrition.                  4


                         e. Needs assistance to be able to manage a therapeutic            6
                         source to take nutrition.


                         f. Cannot convey food and drink to their mouth and needs          10
                         another person to do so.


3. Managing therapy or   a. Either –                                                       0
monitoring a health
condition.               (i) does not receive medication or therapy or need to monitor
                         a health condition; or


                         (ii) can manage medication or therapy or monitor a health
                         condition unaided.


                         3(b) Needs any one or more of the following —                     1


                         (i) to use an aid or appliance to be able to manage medication;


                         (ii) supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to
                              manage medication;


                              (iii) supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to
                              monitor a health condition


                              c. Needs supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to    2
                              manage therapy that takes no more than 3.5 hours a week.


                              d. Needs supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to    4
                              manage therapy that takes more than 3.5 but no more than 7
                              hours a week.


                              e. Needs supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to    6
                              manage therapy that takes more than 7 but no more than 14
                              hours a week.


                              f. Needs supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to    8
                              manage therapy that takes more than 14 hours a week.


4.Washing and bathing         a. Can wash and bathe unaided.                                 0


                              b. Needs to use an aid or appliance to be able to wash or      2
                              bathe.


                              c. Needs supervision or prompting to be able to wash or        2
                              bathe.


                              d. Needs assistance to be able to wash either their hair or    2
                              body below the waist.


                              e. Needs assistance to be able to get in or out of a bath or   3
                              shower.


                              f. Needs assistance to be able to wash their body between      4
                              the shoulders and waist.


                              g. Cannot wash and bathe at all and needs another person to 8
                              wash their entire body.


5. Managing toilet needs or   a. Can manage toilet needs or incontinence unaided.            0
incontinence.                 b. Needs to use an aid or appliance to be able to manage        2
                              toilet needs or incontinence.


                              c. Needs supervision or prompting to be able to manage          2
                              toilet needs.


                              d. Needs assistance to be able to manage toilet needs.          4


                              e. Needs assistance to be able to manage incontinence of        6
                              either bladder or bowel.


                              f. Needs assistance to be able to manage incontinence of        8
                              both bladder and bowel.


6. Dressing and undressing.   a. Can dress and undress unaided.                               0


                              b. Needs to use an aid or appliance to be able to dress or      2
                              undress.


                              c. Needs either -                                               2


                              (i) prompting to be able to dress, undress or determine
                              appropriate circumstances for remaining clothed; or


                              (ii) prompting or assistance to be able to select appropriate
                              clothing.


                              d. Needs assistance to be able to dress or undress their        2
                              lower body.


                              e. Needs assistance to be able to dress or undress their        4
                              upper body.


                              f. Cannot dress or undress at all.                              8


7. Communicating verbally.    a. Can express and understand verbal information unaided.       0


                              b. Needs to use an aid or appliance to be able to speak or      2
                              hear.


                              c. Needs communication support to be able to express or         4
                              understand complex verbal information.


                              d. Needs communication support to be able to express or         8
                         understand basic verbal information.


                         e. Cannot express or understand verbal information at all        12
                         even with communication support.


8. Reading and           a. Can read and understand basic and complex written             0
understanding signs,     information either unaided or using spectacles or contact
symbols and words        lenses.


                         b. Needs to use an aid or appliance, other than spectacles or 2
                         contact lenses, to be able to read or understand either basic
                         or complex written information.


                         c. Needs prompting to be able to read or understand              2
                         complex written information.


                         d. Needs prompting to be able to read or understand basic        4
                         written information.


                         e. Cannot read or understand signs, symbols or words at all.     8


9. Engaging with other   a. Can engage with other people unaided.                         0
people face-to-face
                         b. Needs prompting to be able to engage with other people.       2


                         c. Needs social support to be able to engage with other          4
                         people.


                         d. Cannot engage with other people due to such engagement 8
                         causing either –


                         (i) overwhelming psychological distress to the claimant; or


                         (ii) the claimant to exhibit behaviour which would result in a
                         substantial risk of harm to the claimant or another person.


10. Making budgeting     a. Can manage complex budgeting decisions unaided.               0
decisions
                         b. Needs prompting or assistance to be able to make              2
                         complex budgeting decisions.


                         c. Needs prompting or assistance to be able to make simple       4
                         budgeting decisions.
                             d. Cannot make any budgeting decisions at all.                6


                                                                                1 SS (PIP) Regs, Sch 1




Mobility Activities


Column 1              Column 2                                                             Column
                                                                                           3
Activity              Descriptors
                                                                                           Points


1. Planning and       a. Can plan and follow the route of a journey unaided.               0
following journeys.
                      b. Needs prompting to be able to undertake any journey to avoid      4
                      overwhelming psychological distress to the claimant.


                      c. Cannot plan the route of a journey.                               8


                      d. Cannot follow the route of an unfamiliar journey without another 10
                      person, assistance dog or orientation aid.


                      e. Cannot undertake any journey because it would cause               10
                      overwhelming psychological distress to the claimant.


                      f. Cannot follow the route of a familiar journey without another     12
                      person, an assistance dog or an orientation aid.


2. Moving around.     a. Can stand and then move more than 200 metres, either aided or     0
                      unaided.


                      b. Can stand and then move more than 50 metres but no more than 4
                      200 metres, either aided or unaided.


                      c. Can stand and then move unaided more than 20 metres but no        8
                      more than 50 metres.


                      d. Can stand and then move using an aid or appliance more than 20 10
                      metres but no more than 50 metres.


                      e. Can stand and then move more than 1 metre but no more than 20 12
metres, either aided or unaided.


f. Cannot, either aided or unaided,–              12


(i) stand; or


(ii) move more than 1 metre.


                                       1 SS (PIP) Regs, Sch 1
Appendix 2 - UT and Court decisions




The effect of Upper Tribunal and Supreme Court Decisions
This Appendix informs Case Managers (CM) and Decision Makers (DM) of the effect of Upper tribunal
and Supreme Court Decisions on the interpretation of PIP Mobility descriptors 1 and PIP Daily living
descriptors 3, 4 and 9. It also deals with the definition of "Safely" in relation to how to apply the term to
make a descriptor choice.




Subpages

    • PIP The Meaning of “Safely” – effect of UT decision RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP) [2017] UKUT
       0105 (AAC)
    • PIP Mobility Activity 1 – effect of UT decision MH v SSWP (PIP) [2016] UKUT 531 (AAC)
    • PIP Daily Living Activity 3 – effect of UT decision SSWP v LB [2016] UKUT 530 (AAC)
    • PIP Daily Living Activity 9 – effect of Supreme Court Judgement SSWP v MM [2019] UKSC 34
    • PIP Daily Living Activity 4 – effect of UT decision KT and SH v SSWP (PIP) [2020] UKUT 252
       (AAC)
PIP The Meaning of “Safely” – effect of UT decision RJ, GMcL and CS v
SSWP (PIP) [2017] UKUT 0105 (AAC)



INTRODUCTION


1 This page is to advise decision makers about a three judge panel Upper Tribunal (“UT”) decision 1 (“RJ”)
that deals with the definition of “safely” and the linked term “supervision,” and the measurement of risk
to assess those terms.


                                                  1 RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP) [2017] UKUT 0105 (AAC)


2 This explains how to apply the terms of the decision and to make the descriptor choice. For the
practical steps to take to get the effective dates of the decision correct please see PIP Mobility Activity 1
- effect of UT decision MH V SSWP (PIP) [2016] UKUT 531(AAC).


UPPER TRIBUNAL DECISION


Background


1 Two of the cases before the UT concerned claimants with epilepsy and the other case concerned a
deaf claimant with cochlear implants. The issue before the UT was how to determine what is meant by

“safely”1 and when there is a need for “supervision” 2.


                                                                    1 reg 4 (4)(a); 2 SS (PIP) Regs, sch 1 part 1


The decision


2 The UT concluded that:


“In assessing whether a person can carry out an activity safely, a tribunal must consider whether there is
a real possibility that cannot be ignored of harm occurring, having regard to the nature and gravity of the
feared harm in the particular case. It follows that both the likelihood of the harm occurring and the
severity of the consequences are relevant. The same approach applies to the assessment of a need for

supervision.”1


                                         1 RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP) [2017]UKUT 0105 (AAC), para 56


APPLICATION OF THE DECISION


3 For a descriptor to apply, a claimant must be able to carry out the activity “safely”, defined as “in a
manner unlikely to cause harm to the claimant or to another person, either during or after completion of

the activity”1. Where someone is unsafe doing an activity on the majority of days, but by being aided (by
the use of an aid, or by prompting, supervision or assistance 2) the completion of the activity would be
made safe, they satisfy the appropriate descriptor. Safety refers to both the safety of the claimant and

other people.3


                                                  1 SS PIP Regs, reg 4(4)(a) and (c)); 2 reg 2 (a); 3 RJ para 27


4 The pre-RJ guidance when assessing whether a task could be done “safely”, was that any harm had to
be likely to occur, which we said meant “more likely than not” to occur – essentially that the event which
created the risk had to happen on the majority of days. However, this approach can no longer be applied.
The UT found that when assessing whether a person can carry out an activity safely consideration must
be given to whether there is a “real possibility that cannot be ignored of harm occurring”, and confirmed
this applied “even though the harmful event which triggers the risk actually occurs on less than 50% of

the days”1. Factors to be considered are the nature and gravity of the potential harm in each case.


                                                                                                   1 RJ Para 55


5 The question to be asked is whether there is a real possibility of harm to the claimant or another person
when completing the activity. When asking this question both the severity of harm and the likelihood of
harm should be considered. If there is a real possibility of harm that cannot be ignored, then a secondary
question is can the activity be carried out safely if the claimant uses an aid, or has prompting, supervision
or assistance. The answer to this question will determine the descriptor choice.


6 In cases where the effect of the condition occurs on the majority of days (e.g. where a claimant has
total sight loss) there may be no significant change to how the decision maker considers safety. The type
of cases where the approach will most differ is where the effect (or as the UT termed it, the “event”) of
the condition does not occur on the majority of days. Examples of the kind of conditions which may have
intermittent symptoms are epilepsy or mini-strokes.


7 We would not expect claimants to be awarded lower scoring descriptors following the UT decision
when compared to the descriptors that would have been chosen prior to the UT decision.


HOW TO ASSESS WHETHER AN ACTIVITY CAN BE PERFORMED SAFELY


8 All of the following factors should be considered:


1. the frequency of the incident is such that there is a real possibility that harm would occur.


2. the severity of harm caused by the incident whilst performing the activity should be considered.


3. the extent to which the condition is predictable, controlled or risk can be mitigated. If the incidents
are predictable, for example if they only happen at certain times (e.g. when sleeping), have certain
triggers or warning symptoms before they occur, it may be that the claimant can reasonably avoid or
minimise any risk of harm.
9 The UT stated “both the likelihood of the harm occurring and the severity of the consequences are
relevant”. The assessment must be based on a consideration of both the frequency of the event which
means that a claimant might not be able to complete an activity safely and the severity of harm that
might occur.


10 If the severity of harm is very high then an activity might be considered unsafe, even if the frequency
of occurrence is quite low. If the frequency of occurrence is high, then an activity might still be
considered safe if the harm is only minor.


11 When assessing the severity of harm a decision maker must take into account not just the nature of
the event, but also the nature of the activity. The activities will create different risks for each claimant
depending on their condition. For example, Activity 1, preparing and cooking food, involves sharp objects
and hot items, but in some circumstances this risk can be mitigated by carrying out the activity whilst sat
down, or using aids, or by using a microwave and microwave-safe dishes, or having another person
present to supervise.


12 It is important to remember that the severity of a condition can differ from person to person. Details
will be required about the nature, frequency and duration of incident or symptoms, in order to
understand the severity of the harm that might occur.


13 Some conditions may mean that a claimant has a recovery period after the initial incident. Recovery
periods will vary between different individuals and conditions, but usually recovery periods would not
cause a risk to safety as the person would be able to make themselves safe, even if they have not fully
recovered from the incident. It is unlikely that a claimant will satisfy scoring descriptors on the basis of
risk to safety during a recovery period, although this will depend on the nature of the condition. One
must also consider that the risk during recovery will be greater if the person is outside rather than
inside, in the safety of the home – i.e. such risk may be greater for the mobility descriptors than for
the daily living activities. Decision makers should explore the length and impact of the recovery phase.
For example, people with hypoglycaemic events will usually recover a few minutes after taking sugar,
whereas some people with epilepsy may feel tired and need to rest after a seizure, but would not be at
significant risk during this time.


14 When considering the frequency of incidents that could impact safety it is important to consider not
just the number of days that incidents occur but also the likelihood that this happens at the exact
moment when an individual is undertaking an activity that could cause harm. If an activity takes little time
it is less likely that the intermittent incident may occur when the claimant is carrying out that activity.


15 For individuals who experience altered or loss of consciousness there is a risk that they may fall and in
doing so come to harm whilst undertaking an activity. To assess whether this risk means that an
individual cannot undertake the activity safely the decision maker should gather evidence about the
ways in which the claimant is at risk of harm and the type of harm, as well as the likelihood of that harm
occurring. The decision maker should also consider how the individual minimises this risk in other
situations.
16 The decision maker may find it helpful to consider the whole picture of how the claimant’s condition
affects them. For example, there might be relevant evidence which may help demonstrate a real
possibility of risk, such as that a claimant has seizure alarms, or has adapted their house to reduce the
harm of potential falls. As always it is important to assess the consistency of the evidence. Key pieces of
information could include whether they see specialists or have medical input which would support the
frequency or severity of incident. It may also be helpful to consider if the claimant is able to undertake
activities (such as cycling, swimming, working in a hazardous environment or taking young children out of
the house alone), where the severity of harm could be grave. For example, any claimant with a valid
driving licence would be very unlikely to score points due to experiencing symptoms of altered or loss of
consciousness, because if they are considered safe to drive, they usually should also be considered safe
to carry out the descriptors.


EXAMPLES


17 The following examples are for illustration only. They are not designed to provide any guidance on
specific conditions but to show the approach and thought processes involved. It is up to decision makers
to consider the balance of risk for each individual case.


Example 1


The claimant has severe learning disabilities and does not have an awareness of danger. They attend a
specialist day centre during the week and are cared for at home by their parents. They are supervised at
all times due to their learning disability. On the grounds of safety, the decision maker awards 1e because
the claimant would be unable to determine whether food is safe to eat, for example, that meat is properly
cooked; 3b because the claimant would be at risk of accidental overdose when taking medication; 4c
because the claimant would not think to check whether the water was too hot before bathing; and
mobility 1f because the claimant would not be able to work out where to go, follow directions or deal with
unexpected changes to a familiar journey. In this case, the descriptors are the same as those that would
have been awarded before the UT decision. The claimant also scores on other descriptors, but not on
grounds of safety.


Example 2


The claimant has diabetes with hypoglycaemic events which at their most severe can cause them to lose
consciousness. However, they receive warning symptoms of profuse sweating. This warning is sufficient
to allow them time to reduce the likelihood of harm. For instance, if an incident did occur when they were
cooking then claimant would be able to turn off the cooker and find a place to sit or lie down and have
something to eat or drink. Due to this warning, it is reasonable to find that for this claimant the risk of
harm is too remote to satisfy any scoring descriptors on the grounds of safety in any of the relevant
activities.


Example 3


The claimant has narcolepsy events which cause them to lose consciousness. They previously struggled
to manage their condition. Now they have better control over the incidents by having a strict sleep
routine, changes to their diet, exercise and medications. The claimant has their condition under control
and has not had any events for 3 months. As such it is reasonable to find that the risk of harm is too
remote for the claimant to satisfy any of the scoring descriptors in any of the relevant activities.


Example 4


The claimant has absence seizures, without warning, trigger or pattern, up to a few of times a day, which
involve them losing focus and entering a trance like state. Usually the trance only lasts for a few seconds
or up to half a minute. If they are holding items at the time of the absence they wont drop them, they
would not fall or make any other movements. The claimant takes reasonable precautions by using safe
crossings when making journeys. The claimant reports no injuries or incidents occurring as a result of
these absences. Although the frequency of the incidents is common, no harm is likely to come as a result
of these absences so it is reasonable to find that that the claimant satisfies no aids and appliances or
supervision descriptors.


Example 5


The claimant has seizures, for which they receive a brief warning. Although they do not result in falls,
during and after the seizure the claimant is in an extremely disorientated state for a significant period of
time. The claimant is able to make themself safe when in the home and rest whilst the episode subsides.
The decision maker decides that there is not sufficient risk of harm for the daily living activities.
However, when outside the home the claimant cannot make themselves safe and is deemed so
vulnerable during the seizure and recovery period that they would be at risk of harm. Balancing the
frequency of the events and the severity of harm that could occur the decision maker decides to award
mobility descriptor 1f, as the claimant would need accompaniment on all journeys in order to do them
safely.


Example 6


The claimant has had episodes of status epilepticus. This is a life-threatening condition for the claimant
where if their seizure lasts longer than five minutes the claimant needs emergency treatment. Their
partner has been trained to administer the treatment when necessary in accordance with the claimant’s
epilepsy care plan. The last time this happened was 6 months ago, and before that about 12 months ago.
Although the episodes occur infrequently, the claimant is at risk of severe harm if it occurs. A decision is
made that there is a sufficient risk during all relevant activities - someone is always to be supervising in
order to administer emergency treatment if necessary. The claimant scores 1e, 2b(ii), 3b (iii) (supervision
to monitor their health condition), 4c, 5c and mobility descriptor 1f. The decision maker awards standard
rate daily living component (11 points) and enhanced rate mobility component (12 points).


Example 7


The claimant has epilepsy with tonic-clonic seizures. There are no warning symptoms or triggers and the
incidents can happen at any time of the day. When the clamant has a seizure their body will become stiff
and then their arms and legs will start twitching. They may drop any items they are holding and will fall
from a standing position. Incidents happen once per week on average. A decision is made with regard to
each activity where there may be a safety risk for this claimant.


The claimant is able to reduce the risk related to preparing food by using food choppers, slicers and
dicers rather than knives. They are able to further reduce the risk by using the microwave rather than a
hob, and by using microwave-safe dishes (dishes with lids and valves, that do not heat up in the
microwave or break if dropped). They sit to prepare meals, and whilst waiting for them to cook. Therefore
the decision maker reasonably concludes that the claimant can minimise the risk associated with
cooking by using aids and appliances and a microwave and decides on descriptor 1c.


Activity 2 – Taking Nutrition


This activity is undertaken sitting down, so any risk of falling from standing is removed. The claimant is
not at risk when cutting up food and conveying it to their mouth because if they had a seizure when
undertaking these parts of the activity they would simply drop the cutlery causing some spillage, but
would be highly unlikely to cause any harm to them. However, the last part of the activity, chewing and
swallowing food, may be relevant. During a seizure or event often the mouth will clench and people bite
their tongue, any food in the mouth would remain there and the person having the seizure breathes
through their nose. Alternatively, depending on the nature of the seizure, the swallowing reflex may
be maintained so that the person swallows the food, even whilst semi-conscious. Also the length of
time spent swallowing is short. The claimant has never choked in the past nor mentioned that risk.
The decision maker reasonably concludes that there is no risk of harm sufficient to satisfy any scoring
descriptor and chooses descriptor 2a.


Activity 3 – Managing therapy or monitoring a health condition


It is highly unlikely that the claimant would need supervision at the time of taking medication due to the
risk of choking as this is a momentary action. The claimant requires some time to recover after a seizure,
however, the claimant simply takes their medication later, once they have recovered, and no harm occurs
as a result. The decision maker considers whether an incident could cause harm by delaying any
medications but reasonably concludes that because a delay will not harm the claimant, and chooses
descriptor 3a.


Activity 4 – Washing and bathing


With this activity there is a risk of drowning, even though the likelihood of a seizure happening at the
time of washing and bathing is low, the severity of the consequences are high. The decision maker
concludes that the claimant requires supervision to bathe, so decides on descriptor 4c.


Activity 5 – Managing toilet needs or incontinence


This activity does not take into account mobilising to and from the toilet and there is a very low risk of
harm in this activity if the claimant falls from the toilet. The likelihood of an event occurring at the time of
toileting is also low. The decision maker decides on descriptor 5a.


Mobility Activity 1 – Planning and following journeys


The claimant falls during their seizures. This is deemed to count under mobility activity 1 rather than
mobility activity 2 as it is on account of their cognitive impairment (the losing of consciousness), not their
physical ability to stand and move. The claimant has experienced injuries as a result of these falls. The
decision maker considers the frequency of incidents and the severity of harm that could occur and finds
that the risk is sufficient so that the person reasonably needs another person with them to make those
journeys safely. The decision maker deems that descriptor 1f is the correct choice.




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only




                                                                 DMA Leeds: June 2018
PIP Mobility Activity 1 – effect of UT decision MH v SSWP (PIP) [2016]
UKUT 531 (AAC)

INTRODUCTION
1 The purpose of this page is to inform CMs about a decision of the UT 1, MH v SSWP (PIP) [2016] UKUT
531(AAC) (“MH”), which deals with the interpretation of the descriptors under mobility activity 1.


                                                              1 MH v SSWP (PIP) [2016] UKUT 0531 (AAC);


THE UT DECISION
2 The UT decision is dated 28.11.2016. DWP appealed it to the Court of Appeal and also made a change

to the regulations governing mobility activity 1 which countered some aspects of the decision 1. The

amendments to mobility activity 1 were quashed by the High Court 2. The appeal of MH to the Court of
Appeal was withdrawn. Therefore the decision of MH is the leading decision on the interpretation of
mobility activity 1.


 1 Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) (Amendment) Regulations 2017 SI 2017/194, 2 RF v
                                                                         SSWP [2017] EWHC 3375 (Admin)


MOBILITY ACTIVITY 1 BEFORE MH
3 The position before MH was that descriptors 1d and 1f, which contain the phrase “follow the route”
were restricted to measuring the ability of a claimant to navigate the route. Descriptor 1b and 1e,
containing the phrase “overwhelming psychological distress” were the only descriptors where distress
was relevant. If a person needed accompanying on routes by another person in order to avoid that
overwhelming psychological distress (on the majority of days) they satisfied descriptor 1b.


RJ, GMcL AND CS v SSWP (PIP)[2017] UKUT 105 (AAC)
4 Since the MH decision date there has been another UT decision which impacts directly on the
application of mobility activity 1. On 09.03.2017 a decision, RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP)[2017] UKUT
105 (AAC) (“RJ”), was handed down. The guidance prior to RJ was that when assessing whether a task
could be done “safely”, any harm had to be likely to occur, which we said meant “more likely than not” to
occur – essentially that the event which created the risk had to happen on the majority of days. In RJ the
UT stated that “In assessing whether a person can carry out an activity safely, a tribunal must consider
whether there is a real possibility that cannot be ignored of harm occurring, having regard to the nature
and gravity of the feared harm in the particular case. It follows that both the likelihood of the harm

occurring and the severity of the consequences are relevant.” 1 Details on the effect of RJ can be found
in PIP The Meaning of “Safely” – effect of UT decision RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP) [2017] UKUT 0105
(AAC)


                                        1 RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP) [2017]UKUT 0105 (AAC), para 56
WHAT THE UT DECIDED IN MH
5 As well as explaining the significance of the MH decision for decision making it is important to note
that for claim periods after the relevant determination date of RJ (09.03.17) a decision may have to
change in order to account for that. A decision which covers a claim period that begins prior to the MH
determination date (28.11.16) and continues after the RJ determination date could have three different
descriptors chosen – one prior to MH, one where MH is applied, and one where MH is applied in
accordance with RJ.


6 In MH the UT held that:


1. “Follow the route” (in 1d and 1f) is not restricted to navigation only; it means making one’s way
along a route or going along a route safely. Previous to MH descriptors 1d and 1f were restricted to
navigation only, so problems with psychological distress were not considered. Previous to RJ the
problems with following the route had to manifest on the majority of days, but post-RJ one has to apply
the RJ decision of how safely is to be assessed.


2. Adjusting to road works or navigating past other unexpected obstacles such as a traffic accident is
all part of following the route. This is the the pre-MH position.


3. An inability to communicate effectively so as to correct oneself when lost is not relevant to
following the route, as once lost a person has already ceased to follow the route. This point was the
pre-MH position.


4. A claimant who suffers overwhelming psychological distress whilst on the journey and who needs
to be accompanied to overcome the overwhelming psychological distress may satisfy descriptor 1d
or 1f. Pre-MH this person could only satisfy 1b. Previous to RJ the problems with following the route had
to manifest on the majority of days, but post-RJ one has to apply the RJ decision of how safely is to be
assessed.


5. Descriptor 1b is relevant where a claimant needs prompting to overcome overwhelming
psychological distress when setting off on the journey. As someone who needs another person when
travelling along a route would satisfy 1d or 1f, descriptor 1b only applies in practice in the circumstance
where someone needs prompting to set off on the journey (but would not need another person whilst on
the journey itself). Pre-MH someone in this position would have satisfied descriptor 1b also.


6. Distress or anxiety short of overwhelming psychological distress is not enough to bring a claimant
within descriptor 1d or 1f. The tribunal stated that “Although regulation 4(2A) applies so that the
question is whether, if unaccompanied, the claimant can follow a route safely, to an acceptable standard,
repeatedly and within a reasonable time period, the fact that a claimant suffers psychological distress
that is less than overwhelming does not mean that the claimant is not following the route safely and to an
acceptable standard. The threshold is a very high one. Thus, the facts that the claimant was “anxious”
and “worried”…and was “emotional”…were not sufficient for those claimants to satisfy the terms of
descriptors 1d or 1f because they could in fact complete journeys unaccompanied without being
overwhelmed”. Although pre-MH overwhelming psychological distress is not a factor for 1d and 1f (as
this is only taken into account for 1b and 1e), the high threshold definition is in line with the term
‘overwhelming’ so should be applied to the pre-MH period and onwards.


7. Logically where descriptor 1e is satisfied on the majority of days (because the claimant needs to
avoid overwhelming psychological distress by not undertaking any journey) the claimant cannot also
satisfy descriptor 1f, as this must mean they can undertake a journey (with another person,
assistance dog or orientation aid) on the majority of days. This is the pre-MH position.


8. Mobility activity 1 is designed to cover limitations on mobility deriving from mental health
conditions and cognitive and sensory impairments, whereas mobility activity 2 is designed to cover
limitations on mobility from physical restrictions. This is the pre-MH position.


APPLYING THE MH DECISION
7 From the above one can see that points 1, 4, 5 and 6 of the above are the main points of change that
need to be considered (although all must be taken into account where relevant). Here are some examples
to show how the impact of the MH determination could materially alter the decision making (and how
these points themselves may alter once the RJ interpretation is factored in).


Examples


Please note that all examples are for illustrative purposes and are not exhaustive




The claimant suffers from epilepsy and has seizures without warning
approximately once a week, which has resulted in injuries from falls in the past.
Although they have no physical problems with walking, when they have a
seizure they lose consciousness which amounts to a cognitive and sensory
impairment. That brings the problem within the ambit of mobility activity 1.


          PRE-MH                          MH                       POST-RJ


The CM decides that the       The CM decides that the      The CM decides that
claimant does not suffer      claimant does not have a claimant cannot travel
from a navigational           problem with following       on any routes (familiar
problem on the majority of the route on the majority or unfamiliar) safely
days, and satisfies           of days, and therefore       without another person,
descriptor 1a.                satisfies 1a.                due to the risk of injury
                                                           from falls, as per the RJ
                                                           rationale. The CM
                                                           decides the claimant
                                                         satisfies 1f.




The claimant suffers from episodes of narcolepsy, once or twice a week, which
causes the claimant sudden tiredness resulting in a deep sleep, with little
warning beforehand. Although they have no physical problems with walking,
the narcolepsy, due to resulting in a loss of consciousness, is considered a
sensory and cognitive impairment. The CM therefore attributes this issue to
mobility activity 1. The claimant does not fall and is able to lower themselves to
the ground or a seated position without harm before falling asleep. However,
once asleep they will be unconscious for a significant amount of time, will not
be readily wakened, and during that period will be extremely vulnerable.


                                                                 POST-RJ


                                                         The CM decides that
         PRE-MH                         MH               claimant cannot travel
                                                         on any (familiar or
The CM decides that the     The CM decides that the
                                                         unfamiliar) routes safely
claimant does not suffer    claimant does not have a
                                                         without another person,
from a navigational         problem with following
                                                         due to the risk of harm
problem on the majority of the route on the majority
                                                         whilst the claimant is
days, and satisfies         of days, and therefore
                                                         vulnerable, as per the RJ
descriptor 1a.              satisfies descriptor 1a.
                                                         rationale. The CM
                                                         decides the claimant
                                                         satisfies descriptor 1f.




The claimant has PTSD. When they are outside, if there are loud noises, such as
an emergency vehicle siren, they are likely to suffer an overwhelming panic
attack and cannot travel further without the help of another person to help
overcome that distress. The fear of these panic attacks happening has itself
become so great that the claimant suffers severe anxiety at the thought of
travelling alone.


         PRE-MH                         MH                       POST-RJ


The CM decides that the     The claimant needs           This would not have
claimant’s problems do      accompaniment to travel impact as descriptor 1f
amount to overwhelming      on all routes in order to    is already awarded.
psychological distress. As avoid the effect of
the claimant is able to
                             overwhelming
travel routes if
                             psychological distress.
accompanied, the CM
                             The CM decides to award
decides the claimant
                             descriptor 1f.
satisfies descriptor 1b.




An autistic claimant is able to navigate familiar routes. They are able to
navigate unfamiliar routes but only when following the exact description of the
route they have to take. However, if the unfamiliar route is altered by the
slightest degree, such as by the specific footpath they are following being
inaccessible due to maintenance, they are unable to get themselves back onto
the correct track or continue to follow the planned route.


          PRE-MH                                                 POST-RJ
                                         MH

As the claimant’s                                        The RJ reasoning would
                             The MH reasoning would
problems are related to                                  not change this
                             not change this approach
their ability to navigate,                               approach –the CM
                             –the CM decides 1d is the
the CM decides to award                                  decides 1d is the correct
                             correct descriptor.
descriptor 1d.                                           descriptor.




The claimant becomes anxious before any journey and they are only able to get
out of the door if someone provides encouragement and reassurance that
there are no dangers or threats as a result of going outside. However, once
they are out they are able to follow a route independently without help.


                                         MH                      POST-RJ
The CM decides that, in
order to overcome            The MH reasoning would The RJ reasoning would
overwhelming                 not change this approach. not change this
psychological distress, the As the help to overcome      approach –the CM
prompting of another         overwhelming                decides 1b is the correct
person is required for the   psychological distress is   descriptor.
claimant to set off on a     only in order to help the
journey. The CM chooses      claimant set off on the
descriptor 1b. (NB –if the   journey –the CM decides
help was for both setting    1b is the correct
off on the journey and       descriptor. (NB – if the
whilst on the journey the
                            help was for both setting
                            off on the journey and
claimant would still only
                            whilst on the journey the
score 1b).
                            claimant would score 1d
                            or 1f).




The claimant suffers from low mood. They state they prefer their sister to
accompany them on unfamiliar journeys as they get worried and nervous when
going to new places. However, on the occasions when their sister was not
available and the claimant had to travel on unfamiliar routes alone, although
nervous beforehand, they were able to complete these journeys.


            PRE-MH


The CM, examining                       MH
whether descriptor 1b is
satisfied or not, decides   The CM, examining
that the wish to be         whether descriptor 1d is             POST-RJ
accompanied was a           satisfied or not, decides
preference rather than a    that the wish to be          The RJ reasoning would
requirement and was not     accompanied was a            not change this
needed to overcome          preference rather than a     approach –the CM
overwhelming                requirement and was not decides 1a is the correct
psychological distress.     needed to overcome           descriptor.
Descriptor 1a is chosen.    overwhelming
(NB –the threshold of OPD psychological distress.
is the same throughout the Descriptor 1a is chosen.
pre-MH, MH and RJ
periods).




The claimant, who suffers from agoraphobia, asks for descriptor 1f to be
awarded. However, they state that cannot leave the home on the majority of
days to their condition, irrespective of any help they could receive.


            PRE-MH                      MH                        POST-RJ


The CM decides that as      The same reasoning is        The same reasoning is
the claimant cannot leave unchanged due to MH –          unchanged due to RJ –
the home on the majority the CM chooses descriptor the CM chooses
of days due to
overwhelming
psychological distress
                             1e.                         descriptor 1e.
(and therefore satisfies
descriptor 1e) they cannot
satisfy descriptor 1f.




The claimant has periods of severe anxiety where they are unable to travel on
routes they do not know unless they are accompanied (but they are always able
to travel on routes familiar to them). When they are not suffering from a period
of severe anxiety they are able to manage unfamiliar routes without problem. It
is determined that these severe periods do occur for the majority of days in the
required period, and that they do amount to overwhelming psychological
distress.


            PRE-MH
                                         MH

The CM decides that as
                             The CM decides that the             POST-RJ
the claimant can
                             claimant satisfies
undertake familiar
                             descriptor 1d as on the     The same reasoning is
journeys on the majority
                             majority of days they       unchanged due to RJ –
of days they cannot
                             would need another          the CM chooses
satisfy descriptors 1b or
                             person in order for them to descriptor 1d.
1e (which require that all
                             overcome OPD on
journeys are affected).
                             unfamiliar routes.
Descriptor 1a is chosen.


DECISION MAKING


Relevant determination


8 The decisions of the UT in MH and RJ are “relevant determinations” 1. The dates of the determinations
are 28.11.16 (MH) and 9.3.17 (RJ). The following paragraphs set out the practical steps to take to get the
effective dates of the decision correct when applying MH and MH as impacted by RJ.


                                                                           1 SS Act 98, s27(link is external)


NEW CLAIMS AND REASSESSMENTS
Deciding claims made on or after the relevant determinations


9 Claims to PIP which are made on or after 28.11.16 should be decided in accordance with MH and claims
which are made on or after 9.3.17 should be decided in accordance with MH and RJ. The 3 month
qualifying period condition for PIP can be met where, applying the approach in the relevant
determinations, the claimant would have been found to have limited or severely limited ability to carry
out relevant activities in the 3 months prior to the relevant determination.


Deciding claims made before the relevant determinations


10 The relevant determinations should not be applied to claim periods on or before 27.11.16 and/or 8.3.17
(but see the paragraph above regarding the qualifying period condition). This is because the Secretary of

State must only apply relevant determinations for periods from the date of the judgment 1. This means
that where, for example, claims are made before 9.3.17 the DM will have to determine the claim by
consideration of the relevant descriptors in 2 ways. Firstly for the period up to and including 8.3.17 by
consideration of the relevant descriptors using the approach applied in MH, and secondly by
consideration of the relevant descriptors from and including 9.3.17, in accordance with the relevant
determination in RJ. This may mean that in some cases the DM decides that there is no entitlement to
PIP from the date of claim to 8.3.17 but that an award can be made from 9.3.17.


                                                                             1 SS Act 98, s27(link is external)


Example


A claim to PIP is made from 8.2.17. A DM is deciding the case on 3.5.18.The claimant’s case is affected by
MH and RJ – prior to RJ they satisfied the standard rate of the mobility component and following RJ they
will score more points sufficient to give them the enhanced rate of the mobility component. The DM
applies MH from 8.2.17; and RJ from and including 9.3.17 but not to the period before 9.3.17. The claimant
is awarded the standard rate from 8.2.17 to 8.3.17 and the enhanced rate from 9.3.17 onwards.


Reassessment cases


11 In accordance with ADM P5062-P5063, in a DLA to PIP reassessment case the DM should apply the

reasoning in MH and RJ and award PIP where appropriate following the 28 day run on period 1.


                                                              1 PIP (TP) Regs, reg 17(1) & (2)(link is external)


Example 1


The claimant is entitled to DLA and is invited to claim PIP on 1.3.17 (i.e. before RJ). The DM makes a
decision on 3.4.17 (after the relevant determination in RJ) that following RJ she is entitled to the
enhanced rate of the mobility component of PIP. In accordance with ADM P5062 – P5063, the first pay
day after the determination is 5.4.17 therefore the claimant’s DLA will terminate on 2.5.17 and the
payment of the enhanced rate of the mobility component of PIP will commence on 3.5.17.


Example 2
The claimant is entitled to DLA and is invited to claim PIP on 1.12.16 (i.e. after MH but before RJ). The DM
makes a decision on 5.1.17 (again, after the relevant determination in MH but before RJ) that following
MH and then RJ she is entitled to the standard rate of the mobility component (MH) and then the
enhanced rate of the mobility component of PIP (RJ). In accordance with ADM P5062 – P5063, the first
pay day after the determination is 11.1.17 therefore the claimant’s DLA will terminate on 7.2.17. The
payment of the standard rate of the mobility component will commence on 8.2.17 and the payment of
the enhanced rate of the mobility component of PIP will commence on 9.3.17.


Award Reviews and the LEAP exercise


12 Decisions made in the period on or after 28.11.16 and 9.3.17 to the date of this guidance being issued
and all PIP awards in payment on 28.11.16 and 9.3.17 will be reviewed in an independent exercise (called a
LEAP exercise). Award reviews should be decided as set out below and it is important to understand how
the LEAP exercise interacts with these decisions.


AWARD REVIEWS
13 On planned and unplanned award reviews where the claimant has not specifically asked for their
award to be looked at in the light of MH and/or RJ, it may be that the claimant benefits from the relevant
determination(s). However, given the planned LEAP exercise, it has been decided that a supersession
decision made on review should only be effective from the date that would normally apply when
superseding on the grounds raised by the review. Any increase in entitlement for a period prior to that
will be captured in the LEAP exercise.


Example 1 – Planned review - condition unchanged – award increased


The claimant has an award of the daily living component only. A planned review is initiated on 1.2.18. The
AR1 indicates that the claimant’s condition and their ability to carry out activities has remained the same.
Normally, all that would be needed would be a supersession decision to extend the period of the award.
However, following MH the claimant has satisfied the conditions for an increase since 28.11.16. The DM
takes MH and RJ into account and supersedes so as to award the increase from the date of

decision1 (receipt of medical evidence). The period from 28.11.16 to the day before the date of the new
decision will be considered in the LEAP exercise.


                                                    • 1 UC,PIP,JSA & ESA (D&A) Regs , reg 26(1)(a) & s10(5)


Example 2 – Planned review – supersession carried out on the basis of a change of circumstances


A planned award review is initiated on 1.2.18. The AR1 indicates that the claimant’s condition has
deteriorated and the DM identifies a relevant change of circumstances (such that the 3 month QP has
been met by 1.2.18). The DM makes a decision to supersede the award on the grounds of a relevant

change1 from 1.2.18, taking into account both MH, RJ and the deterioration. The period from 28.11.16 to
31.1.18 will be considered in the LEAP exercise.
                                         • 1 UC,PIP,JSA & ESA (D&A ) Regs, reg 23 & Sch 1, Part 2 para 18


Example 3 – Unplanned review - supersession carried out on the basis of a change of circumstances


The claimant notifies deterioration in their condition and increased needs on 13.2.18. The increased
needs arose from 1.11.17. The DM determines that the QP was met on 1.2.18 and that the claimant applied
for supersession within a month of that date. It is noted that the claimant would be affected by MH and
RJ prior to the deterioration. The DM makes a decision to supersede the award from 1.2.18 as a result of

the change of circumstances1 taking into account RJ. The period from 28.11.16 to 31.1.18 will be
considered in the LEAP exercise.


                                         • 1 UC,PIP,JSA & ESA (D&A ) Regs, reg 23 & Sch 1, Part 2 para 15


Example 4 – Unplanned review - supersession carried out on the basis of a change of circumstances


The claimant (who has a daily living component award only at the standard rate) notifies a deterioration in
their condition and increased needs on 4.9.17, but those increased needs date back to 4.11.16. The QP
was met from 4.2.17. Although the claimant did not report the change in their condition on time, the DM

decides that the time limit for notifying the change can be extended 1. The new needs create an award of
the mobility component at the standard rate (MH), but it is noted that the effect of RJ would be to raise
the mobility component to the enhanced rate. Taking into account both the change of circumstances
and the relevant determinations, the DM supersedes to award both components at the standard rate

with effect from 4.2.17 on the grounds of a relevant change of circumstances 2. The DM makes a further

supersession decision, on the grounds of error of law 3, to award the enhanced rate from 9.3.17 as a
result of RJ (See ADM A4250 to A4252 – reinterpretation of the law). The period from 28.11.16 to 3.2.17
will be considered in the LEAP exercise.


    •        1 UC,PIP,JSA & ESA (D&A ) Regs, reg 36, 2 reg 23 & Sch 1, Part 2 para 15. 3 Regs 24 & 35(5)


MR REQUESTS
14 A claimant might apply for MR of a supersession decision where the DM has followed the guidance in
paragraph 13 and left a period to be considered in the LEAP exercise. If the application:


• does not specifically ask for the earlier period to be looked at in the light of MH and RJ, the DM should
only consider whether the decision is correct from the effective date calculated in accordance with
paragraph 13


• specifically asks for the earlier period to be looked at in the light of MH and RJ, the DM should refer
these cases to the LEAP team.


ADVANCE CLAIMS
15 Fixed term awards may generate advance claims. A notification is generated 14 weeks before the end
date of the award which tells the claimant that entitlement is due to end and they should submit a new
claim if they want to. If a new claim is made on time and it is decided that entitlement should continue, a
new award will be made from the day after the end of the current award.


Example


An award of standard rate mobility component is due to end on 1.3.18. The claimant makes an advance
claim on 1.2.18. The DM decides that the enhanced rate of PIP is appropriate from 2.3.18 (MH and/or RJ
applying to the case). The DM should not apply MH and RJ to the case from 28.11.16 to 1.3.18 as this will
be considered in the LEAP exercise. The enhanced rate should be awarded from 2.3.18.


APPEALS
To Note – The following paragraphs 19-21 apply to cases where the decision maker has not
considered/applied MH and/or RJ.


Appeals against decisions made after 9.3.17


16 Where the claimant has appealed against a decision that was made after 9.3.17, the FtT must take MH
into account when deciding it but cannot apply it to periods before 28.11.16. The FtT must also take into
account RJ but cannot apply it to periods before 9.3.17. (See the addendum to this Appendix for an
explanation of the supporting legislation and case law.) The Secretary of State’s response to the FtT
should ask them to take MH into account from 28.11.16 and RJ into account from 9.3.17 onwards.


Appeals against decisions made on or before 9.3.17 but after 28.11.16


17 Where the claimant has appealed against a decision that was made on or before 9.3.17 but after
28.11.16, the FtT can apply RJ to the whole period covered by the decision under appeal – both before
and after 9.3.17. This is because the legislation that limits the application of a relevant determination

does not apply to decisions made on or before the date of the relevant determination. 1 (See paragraphs 7
and 8 of the Addendum to this Appendix.)


The appeals officer should mention RJ in their response to the FtT and ask them to take the decision into
account. The DM should not revise the decision in the light of RJ prior to the hearing and lapse the appeal
because any revision decision made after 9.3.17 would only be able to take RJ into account from 9.3.17. It
is therefore potentially more advantageous to the claimant to allow the tribunal to decide the matter.


However the reinterpretation in MH (if appropriate) cannot be applied to periods before 28.11.16 (See the
addendum to this Appendix for an explanation of the supporting legislation and case law.)


                                                                                       1 SS Act 98, s 27(1)(b)


Appeals against decisions made on or before 28.11.16


18 Where the claimant has appealed against a decision that was made on or before 28.11.16 the FtT can
apply MH and/or RJ to the whole period covered by the decision under appeal – both before and after
28.11.16 and 9.3.17 (See paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Addendum to this Appendix.)


The appeals officer should mention MH and RJ in their response to the FtT and ask them to take the
decisions into account. The DM should not revise the decision in the light of MH and RJ prior to the
hearing and lapse the appeal because any revision decision made after 28.11.16 and 9.3.17 would only be
able to take MH into account from 28.11.16 and RJ into account from 9.3.17. It is therefore potentially
more advantageous to the claimant to allow the tribunal to decide the matter.




ADDENDUM - GUIDANCE FOR APPEALS OFFICERS
1 These notes are intended as a guide to help appeals officers write submissions to the FtT where MH
and RJ apply to the decision under appeal and the decision covers a period before 28.11.16 and 9.3.17.


2 The UT decisions in MH v SSWP (PIP) [2016] UKUT 0531 (AAC) and RJ, GMcL and CS v SSWP (PIP)
[2017] UKUT 0105 (AAC) are “relevant determinations” that re-interpret the law. Their effect is that
other decisions that incorporate any other interpretation of the law are wrong in law (see ADM A4250 to
A4252). The dates of the relevant determinations are 28.11.16 (MH) and 9.3.17 (RJ).


3 Paragraph 3(a) of Section 27 of the Social Security Act 1998 says that where a decision falls to be
made on a date after a relevant determination was made:


“In so far as the decision relates to a person's entitlement to a benefit in respect of—


(a) a period before the date of the relevant determination; or


(b) ……,


    • it shall be made as if the adjudicating authority's decision had been found by the Upper Tribunal or
          court not to have been erroneous in point of law.”


4 This means that when making a decision after 28.11.16, the DM cannot apply MH to any period before
28.11.16. When a decision is made after 9.3.17, the DM cannot apply RJ to any period before 9.3.17. Any
award or increase that the claimant is entitled to on account of MH is only effective from 28.11.16 and

any award or increase that the claimant is entitled to on account of RJ can only be effective from 9.3.17 1


                                                          1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (D&A) Regs, regs. 24 & 35(5)


5 When a FtT decides an appeal, they make a decision that the Secretary of State could have made on
the date on which the decision was made. This was explained by a Tribunal of Commissioners (now
Upper Tribunal Judges) who said the following in paragraph 25 in R(IB) 2/04:


“Taking the simple case of an appeal against a decision on an initial claim, in our view the appeal tribunal
has the power to consider any issue and make any decision on the claim which the decision-maker could
have considered and made. The appeal tribunal in effect stands in the shoes of the decision-maker for
the purpose of making a decision on the claim.”


6 It follows that if the DM was bound by Section 27 when making a decision, the FtT are bound by it when
standing in the DM’s shoes. This was confirmed by UT Judge (then Commissioner) Jacobs
in CH/0532/06. In considering the equivalent provision to Section 27 for Housing Benefit, he said the
following in paragraph 14:


    • “As the decision-maker was bound by paragraph 18, the tribunal must be also. The same result is
       produced by the consideration that, were it otherwise, the effect of paragraph 18 could be
       avoided by the simple expedient of lodging an appeal against the local authority’s decision”.


7 However, a FtT is only bound by Section 27 if the DM was bound by it on the date on which the decision
was made. If Section 27 did not apply when the decision under appeal was made because it was made on
or before the relevant determination date, the FtT cannot apply it when considering an appeal against
that decision.


8 This means that if a claimant appeals against a decision made on or before 28.11.16, the FtT can apply
the interpretation in MH to the whole of the period covered by the decision, even if some of it is before
28.11.16. If a claimant appeals against a decision made on or before 9.3.17, the FtT can apply the
interpretation in RJ to the whole of the period covered by the decision, even if some of it is before 9.3.17.


9. In the cases above, the DM should mention MH and RJ in their response to the FtT and ask them to
take them into account. The DM should not revise the decision prior to the hearing and cause the appeal
to lapse because their revised decision (now being made after 28.11.16 or 9.3.17) could only take MH into
account from 28.11.16 and/or RJ into account from 9.3.17. It is therefore more advantageous to the
claimant to allow the FtT to decide the matter.




DMA Leeds: June 2018
PIP Daily Living Activity 3 – effect of UT decision SSWP v LB [2016]
UKUT 530 (AAC)



INTRODUCTION
1. The purpose of this page is to inform Case Managers about a decision of the Upper Tribunal (UT),

SSWP V SSWP v LB [2016] UKUT 0530 (AAC) UKUT 530 (AAC)(“LB”) 1, which deals with the
interpretation of the descriptors under daily living activity 3. The relevant determination date of this
decision is 28.11.16 (meaning this decision only applies from that date forwards). This decision is the
subject of an administrative exercise (AE). This means that as an ordinary decision maker you will only
apply the LB decision from the effective date that would normally apply to the decision in the course of
business as usual. Any period prior to that ‘usual’ effective date shall be dealt with by the specialist AE
decision makers.


                                       1 SSWP v LB [2016] UKUT 530 (AAC)(CPIP/721/2016)


2. Please note that the daily living activity descriptor of 3(b) referred to is taken from Part 2 of Schedule
1 to the Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013 as at the date of decision,

28 November 2016, prior to the regulation change that came into force on 16 March 2017 1 which
changed that descriptor (and some definitions). Please see the addendum for the differences between
the Schedules following that regulation change. Please note that the descriptors and definitions must
be applied to the correct time periods.


                 1 Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) (Amendment) Regulations 2017


THE UT DECISION

BACKGROUND
3. The appeal concerned a claimant with type 1 diabetes who stated she required assistance from her
partner to constantly monitor her blood sugar levels and help her with her sugar and insulin intake. The
main issues before the UT were (i) whether the help the claimant received from her partner fell under
monitoring a health condition and managing medication thus satisfying descriptor 3(b)(ii) or whether it
was therapy so that the claimant satisfied a higher scoring descriptor, and (ii) whether actions taken by
another person to help the person with managing a special diet could come under the definition of
therapy.


WHAT THE UT DECIDED
4. There are two elements to the UT’s decision:


    1. The UT decided that in certain circumstances a combination of the two limbs of descriptor 3(b)(ii)
        (managing medication, and monitoring a health condition) could be classed as therapy (and move
        the claimant to descriptors 3(c) to 3(f), or to a higher scoring descriptor if already at 3(c) to 3(e)).
        From now on, this is referred to as the “MAM element” (medication and monitoring)
     2. The UT decided that supervision, prompting or assistance with the management of a special diet
        could be classed as part of managing therapy. From now on, this is referred to as the “DAT
        element” (diet as therapy).


APPLICATION OF THE DECISION
5. Please take particular note that the MAM and DAT elements of this decision are to be applied
differently. The effect of the MAM element was reversed by the Social Security (Personal Independence
Payment) (Amendment) Regulations 2017, which came into force on 16 March 2017. This means that it
only has effect from 28 November 2016 until 15 March 2017. However, the DAT element was not
affected by that regulation change so applies from 28 November 2016 onwards.


6. Please also note that there may be an interaction between this decision and that of the decision in RJ,
GMcL and CS v SSWP [2017] UKUT 0105 (AAC) (now reported as [2017] AACR 32). RJ had a relevant
determination date of 9 March 2017. This means that RJ did not apply at the time of the relevant
determination in LB (28 November 2016). There may be circumstances where the award you give on
account of this LB decision will change once one reaches 9 March 2017, and one applies RJ, rather than
the pre-RJ interpretation - see PIP The Meaning of “Safely” – effect of UT decision RJ, GMcL and CS v
SSWP (PIP) [2017] UKUT 0105 (AAC) - for those differing interpretations - and may change again
effective from 16/03/2017 due to the change in law which cancelled-out the MAM element of LB. Please
see example 5, paragraph 9, and example 4, paragraph 10 for illustration.


7. For the MAM element (for the period between 28 November 2016 to 15 March 2017), the
combination of managing medication and monitoring a health condition would apply as follows:


7.1 if the claimant requires supervision, prompting or assistance with only one limb of descriptor 3(b)(ii)
(i.e. only managing medication, or only monitoring a health condition) on over 50% of the days in the
required period then they should continue to satisfy descriptor 3(b)(ii);


7.2 descriptors 3(c) – 3(f) can be satisfied where a claimant meets both limbs of the descriptor (i.e. they
require supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to manage medication and supervision,
prompting or assistance to monitor a health condition) in combination on over 50% of the days in the
required period (NB – overlapping days, where they satisfy both limbs on the same day, count as one day,
not two days, in the majority of day calculations), and


7.3 where both limbs (i.e. managing medication and monitoring a health condition) are present on the
majority of weeks in the required period. In order for descriptors 3(c) to 3(f) to be satisfied the help with
the therapy must be required on the majority of weeks (rather than the usual majority of days).
Therefore, if help with either limb is required for less than the majority of weeks, then it could not
contribute to the satisfaction of descriptors 3(c) to 3(f). The correct descriptor choice would then be 3(b)
(ii), rather than 3(c);
7.4 where in combination the two limbs of descriptor 3(b)(ii) occur on the majority of days, and also both
limbs are present on the majority of weeks, the claimant should be considered as receiving help to
manage therapy (and the time taken for the supervision, prompting or assistance must be measured in
hours per week in order to decide which descriptor from 3(c) - 3(f) applies, added together with any time
already measured for therapy using the regular definitions);


7.5 where a claimant receives medication as part of the ‘take action’ aspect of monitoring a health
condition that will be considered as satisfying both monitoring a health condition and also managing
medication, and therefore will be classed as therapy (if that takes place on the majority of days, and also
the majority of weeks).


NB – When measuring the time taken to monitor a health condition one only counts the time taken to
detect a significant change (not all the monitoring time), and then the time taken to take the action to
prevent the deterioration. The definition of ‘monitor health/monitor a health condition’ is “(a) detect
significant changes in C’s health condition which are likely to lead to a deterioration in C’s health; and (b)
take action advised by a-(i) registered doctor; (ii) registered nurse; or (iii) health professional who is
regulated by the Health Professional Council, without which C’s health is likely to deteriorate”.


8. For the DAT element (for periods from and including 28 November 2016), supervision, prompting or
assistance with the management of a special diet, this could be classed as part of managing therapy
where;


8.1 the diet has been prescribed or recommended by a health professional (a registered doctor, nurse or
other health professional regulated by the Health and Care Professions Council), and


8.2 managing the requirements of the special diet means it is necessary to pay attention to both the
nature and timing of food and/or drink (i.e. if the special diet concerns only the nature of the food that is
not enough); and


8.3 failing to adhere to the special diet would result in a deterioration of the condition within an
immediate or short period of time. This requirement is so that general dietary advice, which any person
may receive from their doctor (e.g. lose weight, eat healthier meals), and which may prevent deterioration
in general health over a longer term, is not classed as being part of a special diet. Whether such a
deterioration is deemed to occur within an immediate or short period of time will be a matter for the
judgement of the decision maker in the circumstances of each case


Only the time required for supervision, prompting or assistance with the management of the special diet
will count towards therapy time, not time spent preparing & cooking food (measured within Daily Living
Activity 1) or eating the food (measured within Daily Living Activity 2). Instead, it is the additional time to
undertake the additional actions necessary to manage the special diet. This could include weighing out
food or checking food to ensure the correct nutritional content is prepared correctly. The time spent on
the special diet would be added together with any other time designated as therapy in order to ascertain
which descriptor from 3c to 3f would apply.
Examples


9. For the MAM element (a combination of medication and monitoring a health condition being
classed as managing therapy)


Example 1


The claimant needed assistance with managing medication every day. They also needed assistance with
monitoring a health condition one day a week. Previously they would have satisfied 3(b)(ii) as they
needed assistance to manage medication on the majority of days. However, post-LB (for the closed
period of 28 November 2016 to 15 March 2017) the combination of needing both medication and
monitoring a health condition, on the majority of days in combination, and with both limbs occurring on
the majority of weeks, means they are counted as needing supervision, prompting or assistance with
therapy. The claimant moves to descriptors 3(c) to 3(f). The DM counts the time taken for the help
needed to manage medication and the time taken for the help with monitoring health (which means the
time taken to detect the significant change and time taken to help take the action which prevents the
deterioration), in order to decide which descriptor from 3(c) to 3(f) applies (up to 15 March 2017).


Example 2


The claimant needs help to manage medication on a daily basis. They also need help with monitoring a
health condition once every three weeks. Although in combination the need for help occurs on the
majority of days, as help with monitoring a health condition does not occur on the majority of weeks, that
is not frequent enough for MAM to become therapy. The DM selects descriptor 3(b)(ii).


Example 3


Example 4


The claimant needs another person to monitor their health, in the form of checking their blood with a
test. On the majority of days that blood test reveals a deterioration in their condition which can then be
remedied by helping the claimant take a drug (as the claimant cannot do this themselves). As the method
by which the remedy occurs involves the taking of medication, following LB it is considered as
simultaneously being managing medication and monitoring a health condition and is therefore classed as
therapy. The DM counts the time taken for the help needed to manage medication and the time taken for
the help with monitoring health (which means the time taken to detect the significant change and time
taken to help take the action which prevents the deterioration), in order to decide which descriptor from
3(c) to 3(f) applies (for the closed period of 28 November 2016 to 15 March 2017).


Example 5 – RJ applies


The DM decides that the claimant does not require help to manage medication nor to monitor a health
condition on the definition prior to RJ. However, following RJ (from 9 March 2017 onwards) the claimant
would need help with both limbs of descriptor 3b(ii). After working out that 6 hours per week are required
the DM gives the claimant descriptor 3d. However, that only applies from 9 March 2017 until 15 March
2017, when the regulation change takes effect. From 16 March 2017 the MAM element no longer has
effect, meaning that the award level is reduced back to descriptor 3(b)(ii).


10. For the DAT element (supervision, prompting or assistance with the management of a special
diet)


Example 1


The claimant states they need help to deal with a special diet which involves avoiding certain foodstuffs.
However, the diet was not prescribed or recommended by any of their medical professionals, rather it is
something they found on the internet. As such it does not meet the definition of therapy so the DM
decides that any time spent helping the claimant with that diet is excluded from any therapy duration
calculation.


Example 2


The claimant states they need help to deal with their diet. Their GP has recommended they lose some
weight and eat a healthier diet. As this diet does not involve any immediate deterioration in the
claimant’s condition should the claimant fail to adhere to it, the DM decides that it does not meet the
guidance for being a special diet as therapy, and any time spent helping the claimant with that diet is
excluded from any therapy duration calculation.


Example 3


The claimant states they need help to deal with their diet (and the DM accepts that they are unable to
manage this themselves). Due to their condition the claimant has been instructed by a health
professional to eat regularly through the day, and to avoid certain foods. The DM determines that failure
to comply with this would result in an immediate deterioration. Someone must prompt the claimant to
eat at the right times, and must also check their meals to ensure they contain the correct content. As the
help is with the nature and timing of the claimant’s diet the DM adds together the time spent prompting
the claimant and the time spent checking each meal in order to determine which therapy descriptor (3c
to 3f) applies.


Example 4 – RJ applies


The DM decides that the claimant does not require diet as therapy as they do not require help using the
pre-RJ interpretation of risk. However, as at 9 March 2017, following RJ relevant determination, the
claimant would require that help with diet as therapy. 2 hours help per week are required so the DM gives
them descriptor 3(c) from 9 March 2017 onwards.


Example 5 – MAM and DAT at same time
condition, in combination on the majority of days, which is therefore treated as therapy. That requires 3
hours per week of help from another person, so 5 hours in total in combination with the DAT element
time. For the period of 28 November 2016 to 15 March 2017 the claimant is awarded descriptor 3(d), for
needing more than 3.5 but less than 7 hours of help per week. Then, from 16 March 2017 onwards,
removing the MAM element from consideration, the claimant is moved to descriptor 3(c), as only 2 hours
of help remain.




Addendum - Schedule 1 Of The Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013 –
Before And After Regulation Change Dated 16 March 2017


APPLIES UP TO AND INCLUDING 15
                                            APPLIES FROM 16 MARCH 2017 ONWARDS
MARCH 2017


Schedule 1 - Part 1 Interpretation          Schedule 1 – Part 1 Interpretation


                                            “therapy” means therapy to be undertaken at home which is
“therapy” means therapy to be
                                            prescribed or recommended by a – (a)registered – (I) doctor (ii)
undertaken at home which is
                                            nurse; or (iii)pharmacist; or (iv) health professional regulated by
prescribed or recommended by a –
                                            the Health Professions Council; but does not include taking or
(a)registered – (i) doctor (ii) nurse; or
                                            applying, or otherwise receiving or administering, medication
(iii)pharmacist; or (iv) health
                                            (whether orally, topically or by any other means) or any action
professional regulated by the Health
                                            which, in C’s case, falls within the definition of “monitor a health
Professions Council
                                            condition”


Part 2 – Daily Living Activities            Part 2 – Daily Living Activities


3b. Needs either-                           3b. Needs any one or more of the following-

(I) to use an aid or appliance to be able (i) to use an aid or appliance to be able to manage medication;
to manage medication; or
                                            (ii) supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to manage
(ii) supervision, prompting or              medication.
assistance to be able to manage
medication or monitor a health              (iii) supervision, prompting or assistance to be able to monitor a
condition                                   health condition.




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only


                                                            DMA Leeds: October 2019
PIP Daily Living Activity 9 – effect of Supreme Court Judgement
SSWP v MM [2019] UKSC 34



Introduction

1. The purpose of this page is to inform decision makers (DM) about a judgment of the Supreme Court.

The Upper Tribunal case of [2016] UKUT 191 (AAC)1, which dealt with the interpretation of the
descriptors under daily living activity 9, was the subject of an appeal to the Court of Session [2017] CSIH
57, which itself was appealed to the Supreme Court in SSWP v MM, [2019] UKSC 34 2.


2. It is important to be aware that this decision will be subject to an administrative exercise. As a non-
administrative exercise decision maker you will only take this decision into account from the normal
effective date of decision before you. Any relevant period of entitlement prior to the effective date you
are dealing with will be picked up by the decision makers working on the administrative exercise.


                                 1 MMcK v SSWP [2016] UKUT 191 (AAC); 2 [2019] UKSC 34


Background


3. Two issues in respect of daily living activity 9 were in dispute:


      1. What is the distinction between and meaning of the terms “prompting” (descriptor 9b) and
      “social support” (descriptor 9c)?


      2. Can social support be given to a person at a time other than during the activity?


4. The position of the Secretary of State prior to the judgment on 1. was that “social support” was a
distinct category of help from prompting, so that if a claimant required prompting only to engage with
others face to face, they could only satisfy descriptor 9b (no matter who provided that prompting). If
they required help over and above prompting (and it was provided by someone who met the statutory
definition of a giver of “social support” – someone “trained or experienced in assisting people to engage

in social situations”1) then the claimant could satisfy descriptor 9c.


             1 Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013 Part 1 Schedule 1 Part
             1


5. The position of the Secretary of State on 2. was that in order to count as social support the help had to
be given either during the activity, or immediately before it.


What was decided in MM
6. It was held that:
      1. There is an overlap between “social support” and “prompting”. When someone receives

      prompting (i.e. reminding, encouraging or explaining by another person1) from a person who meets
      the definition of a giver of social support (“a person trained or experienced in assisting people to

      engage in social situations”1), then that could be classed as social support, not prompting 2.


                   1 Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013 Schedule 1 Part
                   1; 2 [2019] UKSC 34


      2. In order for descriptor 9c to be satisfied it is not enough for the claimant to be receiving help
      from a person who meets the definition of a giver of social support. Rather the claimant must only
      be able to engage if they have help from persons who are trained or experienced in assisting
      people to engage in social situations. If the help could be from someone who does not meet that

      definition, such as any well-meaning friend or family member 1, then descriptor 9c cannot be met
      (9b would apply in that instance).


                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                             [
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                             ]


                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                             K
                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                             C


                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                             4


      3. In order to qualify as social support, the help need not be given during the activity itself or
      immediately beforehand. However, there still has to be an ongoing need for the claimant to receive
      that social support to be able to engage with other people face to face (for the whole required

      period) as per the requirements of regulation 4(2A) 1.


                                                                                                             1 reg
                                                                                                             4 (2A)


APPLYING THE MM DECISION


7. If the claimant can only engage when they have the help of a person trained or experienced in
assisting people to engage in social situations they would satisfy 9c – it must be a necessity and not a
choice. If the claimant can engage without the help of such an individual/s they do not satisfy 9c.


8. A person providing social support must be trained or experienced in assisting people to engage in
social situations – this can include health professionals and family and friends so long as they meet the
required level in the individual circumstances. A close and comforting relationship is not sufficient to
constitute social support. There must be a need for a person trained or experienced in assisting people
to engage with others.


9. As there is no need for the help from the person providing the social support to be given at the time
of, or just before, the engagement itself, it can include help such as meetings with psychiatric
professionals and mental health workers which then enable the claimant to engage with other people.
However, it must be reasonable to state that it is the help which directly causes the claimant to be able to
engage, and without such specific intervention then engagement face to face would not be possible.
Also, the DM should consider the required period - the claimant must on a balance of probabilities
reasonably require that social support for the duration of the nine-month prospective period (as well as
the three month qualifying period).



Example 1
The DM accepts that the claimant needs prompting in order to engage with other people face to face.
They go on to find that the prompting is provided from any well-meaning friend or family member. The
DM determines that the claimant does not need social support because help is not required from a
person trained or experienced in assisting people to engage in social situations. Descriptor 9b is
selected.



Example 2
The DM determines that the claimant does need prompting in order to engage with other people face to
face. The DM finds that the claimant needs the prompting to be provided solely by their partner or else
they would not be able to engage with others face to face. The claimant’s partner has over many years
become intimately experienced in the needs of their spouse and in what support needs to be given to
allow them to engage with others. The DM deems the partner to have the necessary training and/or
experience to be a giver of social support, and determines that the claimant could only engage
effectively if prompted by them. Descriptor 9c is selected.


Example 3
The DM determines that the claimant is able to engage with other people face to face without problem at
the time of engagement. However, they have a monthly meeting with a therapist who provides
counselling to the claimant. The DM determines that the claimant needs this support as were it not for
those meetings the claimant would not be able to engage with others face to face to an acceptable
standard. They determine that the counselling is a long term treatment and will likely be needed for the
required period. The DM selects descriptor 9c.
Example 4
The DM determines that the claimant is able to engage with other people face to face without problem at
the time of engagement. The DM notes that the claimant completed a course of CBT a few months ago,
and there have been no further planned mental health interventions or medications prescribed since the
completion of the course. The DM determines that there is no longer a need for CBT in order to engage
with others in the present (and for the rest of the required period) and therefore determines that he
needs neither social support nor prompting. The DM selects descriptor 9a.



Example 5
The claimant is able to engage with other people face to face without problem at the time of
engagement. However, before leaving the house to engage with others they must sit down with their
mother who mentally prepares and supports them for the meeting. The DM determines that this
intervention is required for the claimant to be able to engage with others face to face. They determine
that the claimant’s mother meets the definition of someone who gives social support based on their
experience and training for how to prepare the claimant to engage. They also determine that this help
has been required on a long-term basis and is likely to be needed for the required period. The DM selects
descriptor 9c.



Example 6
The claimant is able to engage with other people face to face without problem at the time of
engagement. However, they state they are only able to do this due to an encouraging meeting they have
with a well-meaning friend once a week, which makes them feel more confident. The DM determines
that the meeting is not necessary to allow the claimant to engage with others through the rest of the
week, as it is not specifically focused on helping the claimant engage with others face to face, nor relies
on any techniques or training developed to help engagement. The meeting is not necessary for the
claimant to be able to engage with others face to face. The DM selects descriptor 9a.




Decision Making

Relevant determination
10. The decision in MM is a “relevant determination”1. The date of the determination is not that of the
Supreme Court decision, nor the Court of Session, but the Upper Tribunal decision. Therefore, the date is
06.04.16. The decision only applies from that date onwards.


                                                                                         1 Social Security
                                                                                         Act 98, s 27
The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only


                                                   DMA Leeds: September 2020
PIP Daily Living Activity 4 – effect of UT decision KT and SH v SSWP
(PIP) [2020] UKUT 252 (AAC)

Introduction

1. The purpose of this page is to inform decision makers (DM) about a decision of the Upper Tribunal, KT

and SH v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (PIP) [2020] UKUT 252 (AAC) 1 (“KT & SH”), which
dealt with the interpretation of ‘safely’ for the daily living activity 4 descriptors (“washing and bathing”).


2. It is important to be aware that this decision will be subject to an administrative exercise. As a non-
administrative exercise decision maker you will only take this decision into account from the normal
effective date of decision before you. Any relevant period of entitlement prior to the effective date you
are dealing with will be picked up by the decision makers working on the administrative exercise.


                          1 KT and SH v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (PIP) [2020] UKUT 252
                          (AAC)



Background

3. The decision concerned an appeal by two claimants, both with hearing impairments who removed their
hearing aids before having a bath or shower. The main issue before the UT was to determine whether in

each case the claimant could wash and bathe ‘safely’ within the meaning of regulation 4(4)(a) 1 upon
removing their hearing aids as they would be unable to hear a standard fire or smoke alarm when
showering.


                                  1 The Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations
                                  2013, reg 4


4. The position of the Secretary of State prior to the decision has been that a claimant can wash and
bathe unaided safely upon removing their hearing aids when washing or bathing.



What was decided in KT & SH

5. The Upper Tribunal concluded that both KT and SH could not wash or bathe unaided safely upon

removing their hearing aids as they would not be able to hear a standard fire alarm when showering 1.
They could not be expected to leave the door open whilst washing or bathing as that would mean the

activity was not being undertaken to ‘an acceptable standard’ 2.


             1 KT and SH v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions (PIP): [2020] UKUT 252 (AAC) 2 The
             Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013 reg 4 (2A)(b)


6. Therefore, in each case the claimants needed to use an aid or appliance to enable them to wash and
bathe safely. If the claimant cannot benefit from the use of a relevant aid or appliance, then they will need
supervision to wash and bathe safely. It was accepted in each appeal that severity of harm occurring was
to such a degree that the claimants reasonably needed an aid or appliance, or supervision on over 50%
of the days1 within the required period to enable them to wash and bathe safely.


                                1 The Social Security (Personal Independence Payment) Regulations 2013
                                reg 7



Applying the decision

7. The DM will need to consider from the evidence available to them whether if upon removing their
hearing aids a deaf or hearing impaired claimant can or cannot hear a standard fire alarm when
undertaking the activity of washing and bathing. If the DM concludes that the claimant cannot hear a
standard fire alarm while washing and bathing, then they must go on to consider whether the claimant
needs an aid or appliance to wash and bathe safely. An example of such an aid is a visual alarm
specifically produced for people with hearing impairments.


8. If the DM concludes on the facts of the case that the claimant cannot use an aid or appliance to enable
them to wash or bathe safely then they must consider the need for supervision whilst washing and
bathing.


Example 1
The claimant has been diagnosed with mild sensorineural hearing loss in their left ear. They wear a
hearing aid in their left ear to manage this condition. The claimant does not wear a hearing aid in their
right ear as they have no hearing difficulties in this ear. The DM notes from the evidence that the
claimant has to remove the hearing aid from their left ear when having a shower. The DM concludes from
evidence available to them that upon removing the hearing aid the claimant can hear a standard fire
alarm whilst washing and bathing. The DM selects descriptor 4a.


Example 2
The DM notes from the evidence available to them that the claimant has been diagnosed as having
severe bilateral hearing loss. The claimant has provided evidence confirming that upon removing their
hearing aids they have difficulty hearing against background noise. The claimant states that they keep
the door open when washing and bathing as they will need another person to alert them to a fire. The DM
accepts the claimant cannot hear a standard fire alarm upon removing their hearing aids when washing
and bathing. The DM concludes that the claimant needs an aid or appliance such as a visual alarm to be
able to wash and bathe safely and to an acceptable standard. Descriptor 4b is selected.


Example 3
The DM finds the claimant is profoundly deaf and has been diagnosed with photosensitive epilepsy. The
DM accepts that the claimant cannot hear anything upon removing the external component of their
cochlear implant. The DM considers whether the claimant can wash and bathe safely using an aid such as
a flashing alarm. The DM concludes that the claimant cannot use such an aid as it could trigger their
photosensitive epilepsy and in this case they would need supervision. The DM selects descriptor 4c.




Decision making

Relevant determination
9. The decision in KT & SH is a “relevant determination”1. The date of the determination is 21/08/2020.
The decision only applies from that date onwards.


                                                                                      1 Social Security
                                                                                      Act 98, s 27




The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only


                                                                                                     DMA
                                                                                                     Leed
                                                                                                     s:
                                                                                                     May
                                                                                                     2021
