ADM Chapter G1: Work capability assessment




Subpages

  • Definitions G1012 - G1019
  • When is a work capability assessment carried out G1020 - G1029
  • When is a work capability assessment not carried out G1030 - G1044
  • Application of the work capability assessment G1045 - G1074
  • Information requirements G1075 - G1080
  • The medical report G1093 - G1095
  • Failure to return the questionnaire G1096 - G1104
  • Medical examination G1105 - G1124
  • Consideration of good reason G1125 - G1999
Definitions G1012 - G1019



Meaning of a health care professional G1012


Meaning of claimant G1013 – G1019




Meaning of a health care professional

G1012 A HCP means1


1. a registered medical practitioner or


2. a registered nurse or


3. a registered occupational therapist or physiotherapist 2.


                                                                   1 UC Regs, reg 2; 2 Health Act 99, s 60



Meaning of claimant

G1013 Claimant means a single claimant or each of joint claimants 1.


                                                                                        1 WR Act 12, s 40


G1014 – G1019
When is a work capability assessment carried out G1020 - G1029



Initial and Routine assessments G1020


Exceptions G1021 - G1029




Initial and routine assessments

G1020 A WCA may be carried out when


1. the DM has to determine whether the claimant has LCW or LCWRA for the first time 1 (but see G1005
where the claimant has already been assessed for ESA) or


2. there has been a previous determination that the claimant has or is treated as having LCW or LCWRA,
and the DM wishes to determine whether


      2.1 there has been a relevant change of circumstances in the claimant’s physical or mental
      condition or


      2.2 the previous determination was made in ignorance of, or based on a mistake as to, some

      material fact 2.




Note: For the purposes of G1020. 2.2, doing work for payment or in expectation of payment, or doing

voluntary work, is not a relevant change of circumstances 3. This does not prevent a claimant from being
called for a reassessment for any other reason whilst they are working. The restriction is on using
the fact of working as the sole reason. DMs should continue to consider whether the nature of the work
undertaken might indicate that a change in functional ability has occurred.


Note: If one partner of a couple is over the qualifying age for SPC then that claimant is not precluded
from a WCA.


                                                           1 UC Regs, reg 41(1)(a); 2 reg 41(1)(b); 3 Reg 41A




Exceptions

G1021 A WCA is not normally carried out where1
1. the claimant has weekly earnings2 – see G1030 et seq for further guidance or


2. it was previously determined that the claimant did not have LCW or LCWRA 3 – see G1040 et seq for
further guidance.


                                                        1 UC Regs, reg 41(1); 2 reg 41(2) & (3); 3 reg 41(4)


G1022 – G1029
When is a work capability assessment not carried out G1030 - G1044



Claimant with weekly earnings: the in work gateway G1030


Claimant found not to have LCW or LCWRA G1040 -G1044




Claimant with weekly earnings: the in work gateway

G1030 Normally a claimant who is in work earning above the relevant threshold (see G1033) is


1. not entitled the LCWRA element1 and


2. not subject to work–related requirements2.


Unless any of the exceptions in G1032 apply, the WCA is not carried out, so entitlement to the LCWRA

element cannot be considered3.


                                                              1 UC Regs, reg 27; 2 reg 90; 3 reg 41(2) & (3)


G1031 The in work gateway allows claimants who are working, but are at risk of not being able to do so,
where they


1. are disabled and entitled to AA, DLA, PIP or AFIP or


2. start work after being assessed as having LCW or LCWRA


to be assessed or reassessed under the WCA. If they have LCWRA, the LCWRA element will continue to
be included in the UC amount until the next WCA is due, or there is a specific reason to carry out a fresh
assessment.


Note: DMs should note that this does not apply to ESA. A UC claimant may have LCW for the purposes of
UC, even though for ESA they may be treated as not having LCW because the work is not exempt work.
See ADM Chapter V3 for guidance on exempt work.


G1032 [See Memo ADM 06/25] Where the claimant has weekly earnings1 that are equal to or above the
relevant threshold (see G1033), a WCA cannot be carried out unless


1. they are entitled to2


      1.1 AA3 or
      1.2 DLA4 or


      1.3 PIP5 or


      1.4 AFIP6 or


2. the WCA is to review a previous LCW or LCWRA determination made for the purposes of ESA or UC 7
– see G1035 for further details.




Note: See ADM Chapter J2 (Work–related requirements groups) for guidance on calculation of weekly
earnings.


     1 UC Regs, reg 2 & 90(6); 2 reg 2 & 41(2)(a); 3 SS CB Act 92, s 64, 104, 105, 111 & Sch 8, para 4 & 7(2);
                     WR Act 12, s 64(3)(a); Personal Injuries (Civilians) Scheme 83, art 14, 15, 16, 43 or 44;
      4 SS CB Act 92, s 71; 5 WR Act 12, Part 4; 6 AF & RF (Comp Scheme) Order; 7 UC Regs, reg 41(2)(b)


G1033 The relevant threshold is the amount the claimant would be paid at the highest NMW hourly rate

for 16 hours a week1. See ADM Chapter H3 (Earned income: employed earnings) for NMW rates.


                                             1 UC Regs, reg 41(3); National Minimum Wage Regs 99, reg 11


What if a work capability assessment cannot be carried out


G1034 Where


1. a WCA cannot be carried out as in G10321 and


2. the claimant cannot be treated as having LCW or LCWRA2


the claimant is treated as not having LCW3. But see G1036 for where this does not apply.


Note: See ADM Chapter G2 for where a claimant is treated as having LCW, and ADM Chapter G3 for
where a claimant is treated as having LCWRA.


                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 41(2); 2 reg 39(6) or 40(5); 3 reg 41(2)


Claimant already has LCW or LCWRA


G1035 [See ADM Memo 06-26] If a claimant in work has already been assessed as having LCW or

LCWRA, whether for the purposes of UC or ESA1, a further WCA may be carried out in order to consider

again whether the claimant has LCW or LCWRA2. If already included, the LCWRA element continues to
be included in the UC amount unless and until it is determined that the claimant does not have LCWRA.
                                                    1 ESA Regs, Parts 4 & 5; UC Regs, Part 5; 2 reg 41(2)(b)


G1036 The DM may consider that a further WCA is not required, for example where the claimant’s work
does not give rise to a doubt as to whether they still have LCW. In this case the claimant is not treated as
not having LCW and G1034 does not apply.


Example


Nigel is entitled to UC including the LCWRA element. He has LCWRA because he was born without
hands and cannot pick up and move a carton of liquid, or press the buttons on a keypad, or turn the pages
of a book. Nigel starts office work, earning 16 x the NMW every week. The DM establishes that the job is
in the family business where Nigel uses voice-activated equipment. The DM decides that a further WCA
is not required, and Nigel’s UC award continues to include the LCWRA element.


G1037 – G1039



Claimant found not to have LCW or LCWRA

G1040 Where it has been determined that the claimant does not have LCW following application of the
WCA under UC or ESA legislation, a WCA may not be carried out unless there is evidence to suggest that


1. the determination was based on ignorance of, or mistake as to, some material fact or


2. there has been a relevant change of circumstances in the claimant’s physical or mental condition, for

example where there is a new or worse condition1.


                                                                                        1 UC Regs, reg 41(4)


G1041 – G1044
Application of the work capability assessment G1045 - G1074
Use of prostheses, aids and appliances G1049 - G1061


Use of manual wheelchair G1062 - G1074




G1045 The WCA is an assessment of the extent of a claimant’s ability to perform specified activities

because of their physical or mental condition1. The performance of activities is measured by

descriptors2. The test is the ability to perform any work or work–related activity, not a specific
occupation.


   1 UC Regs, reg 39(3)(a) & 40(2); Sch 6 Column 1 & Sch 7 Column 1; 2 Sch 6 Column 2 & Sch 7 Column 2


G1046 If a descriptor applies as a direct result of treatment provided by a registered medical practitioner
for a specific disease, illness or disablement, it is treated as applying as a result of that disease, illness or

disablement1.


                                                                                            1 UC Regs, reg 42(3)


G1047 See ADM Chapter G2 for guidance on the assessment of whether a claimant has LCW, and
Chapter G3 for guidance on the assessment of whether a claimant has LCWRA.



Use of prostheses, aids and appliances

G1049 A claimant is assessed


1. as if fitted with or wearing any prosthesis with which they are normally fitted (such as an artificial limb)
or normally wear and


2. as if wearing or using any aid or appliance which is normally, or could reasonably be expected to be,

worn or used (such as a hearing aid)1.


                                                                                            1 UC Regs, reg 42(2)


G1050 The DM should apply the following principles:


1. where a claimant normally uses an aid or appliance, they must be assessed as if they were using it


2. if an aid or appliance has been prescribed or recommended by a person with appropriate expertise, the
claimant must be assessed as using it unless it would be unreasonable for them to use it


3. if a claimant does not use an aid or appliance, and it has not been prescribed or recommended, the
claimant must be assessed as if using it if


      3.1 it is normally used by people in the same circumstances acting reasonably and


      3.2 it would be reasonable for the claimant to use it.


G1051 Where G1050 3. applies, the DM must explain how an aid or appliance would help the claimant.


General application
G1052 The test of normal use of an aid or appliance applies to the assessment of all of the physical

activities in the WCA1. It is not restricted to those activities that make specific reference to aids or
appliances.


                                                                                          1 UC Regs, reg 42(2)


G1053 Four of the LCW physical activities1 refer specifically to the use of aids. Activity 1 (mobilising),
Activity 7 (understanding communication), Activity 8 (navigation), and Activity 9 (continence), all refer to
aids that are normally or could reasonably be used. The DM should apply the test in a way that displays
consistency between the WCA as a whole and the assessment of each descriptor in particular.


                                                                                      1 UC Regs, Sch 6, Part 1


Aid or appliance prescribed or advised
G1054 The DM should establish whether the claimant normally uses an aid or appliance, and if not,
whether the use of it has been prescribed or advised.


G1055 If the claimant does not have an aid or appliance which they have been prescribed or advised to
use, the DM should establish


1. whether it would help the claimant


2. why they are not using one


3. whether the explanation is reasonable.


Example


Billy has been advised by his GP to use a walking stick to help with balance problems when walking and
standing. He states that he doesn’t like the idea of a walking stick because it makes him look old. The DM
considers that it would be reasonable to expect Billy to use a walking stick, and assesses LCW and
LCWRA as if he is using it.


Aid or appliance not prescribed or advised
G1056 The WCA should be applied in the context of a notional employer in a modern workplace who is
prepared to make reasonable adjustments1 to enable the claimant to work.


                                                                                           1 Equality Act 2010


G1057 All the circumstances of the individual claimant should be taken into account when considering
whether it would be reasonable to assess them as using an aid or appliance that has not been prescribed
or that they have not been advised to use. An example would be whether it would be reasonable to

expect a claimant to mobilise using a manual wheelchair1.


                                                                                              1 [2015] AACR 5


G1058 Factors include whether


1. the claimant possesses the aid or appliance


2. the claimant was given specific medical advice about managing their condition, and it is reasonable for
them to continue following that advice (see G1062)


3. the claimant would be advised to use an aid or appliance if they raised it with the appropriate authority
such as a GP or occupational therapist (advice may only be given on request)


4. it is medically reasonable for them to use an aid or appliance


5. the health condition or disability is likely to be of short duration


6. an aid or appliance is widely available (see G1065)


7. an aid or appliance is affordable in the claimant’s circumstances (people are not routinely required to
buy equipment where it can be prescribed.)


8. the claimant is able to use and store the aid or appliance (see G1064)


9. the claimant is unable to use an aid or appliance due to their physical or mental health condition, for
example they are unable to use a walking stick or manual wheelchair due to a cardiac, respiratory, upper
body or mental health condition.


Example 1


Miranda has significantly reduced mobility due to arthritis of the right hip and is on the waiting list for a
hip replacement. She uses a walking stick to help with balance, but this does not enable her to walk any
further than 200 metres before she experiences pain. She has not been advised to use a wheelchair. The
HCP advises that she has no other health problems, and in their opinion based on clinical experience,
would be provided with a manual wheelchair if she asked her consultant about this. If she had a
wheelchair, she would be able to mobilise over longer distances. The DM decides that it would be
reasonable, having considered all relevant factors, for Miranda to use a manual wheelchair, and that none
of the Activity 1 descriptors apply.


Example 2


Gary has problems standing due to a condition which affects his balance. He would normally be helped by
the use of a walking stick. However, the HCP advises that due to arthritis of the hands, Gary would have
difficulty using a stick because he has reduced grip. The DM determines that it would not be reasonable
to assess Gary taking a walking stick into account.


G1059 Where it is considered that the claimant should be assessed using an aid or appliance they do not
have, the DM must give a clear explanation of how it could help the claimant. In the majority of cases the
HCP will give advice on their use in the medical report. If not, or if the advice is not clear, the DM should
seek further advice as to how reasonable it is to expect the claimant to use or benefit from the aid or
appliance.


G1060 The aid or appliance must be relevant to the activity being assessed. For example, when
assessing activity 5, manual dexterity, it is not appropriate to consider the use of devices, such as a
grabber, which substitute for the hands, other than prosthetic hands.


G1061 DMs are additionally reminded that some activities and descriptors specify that the person must
be assessed without the help of another person.



Use of manual wheelchair

Medical factors
G1062 All medical considerations affecting an ability to use a manual wheelchair need to be taken into
account, including any potential consequences such as muscle wasting. However, it should be noted that
use of a wheelchair need only be for short distances and for limited periods.


Note: See G1058 2. - 5. and 9. for examples of medical factors which should be considered.


G1063 These considerations apply to all aspects of using a manual wheelchair, including getting in and
out, propelling, and being able to control it. It may be that some of the reasons for not being able to use a
wheelchair are relevant to other functional descriptors, for example inability to move from one seated
position to another unaided.


Home environment
G1064 The claimant’s domestic environment is potentially relevant – see G1058 8.. However, given


1. the underlying purpose of the WCA and


2. the circumstances in the modern workplace


an inability to use or store the wheelchair at home, due to factors such as inaccessible doors or stairs, is
unlikely to be important, as the wheelchair could be stored at the workplace as part of the employer’s
duty to make reasonable adjustments.


Availability of manual wheelchairs
G1065 The availability of manual wheelchairs is a question of fact requiring evidence of how they could
be obtained, including local knowledge. There is no requirement for an NHS wheelchair assessment
before considering whether the claimant could reasonably use a manual wheelchair, although such
evidence would be useful if it existed.


G1066 It should be possible for the Secretary of State to


1. provide evidence about ways of obtaining inexpensive manual wheelchairs, such as from private
companies or charities, if one is required to enable the claimant to work or


2. ensure that the availability of manual wheelchairs is not an issue through a DWP scheme.


G0167 The DM will therefore need to explain in decisions, and responses to the FtT, how the claimant
could obtain a manual wheelchair if that is required to enable them to take up employment.


Evidence
G1068 The DM should consider requesting advice from disability employment advisers about what
provision is available in the claimant’s area, including under any DWP Scheme, such as Access to Work,
or the Flexible Support Fund, that would enable the claimant to take up an offer of employment.


G1069 For more generic evidence, the FtT could be referred to on-line NHS or local authority guidance
about provision of wheelchairs. The DM should also consider whether a manual wheelchair could be
made available on rental terms.


Reasons for DM’s decision
G1070 DMs in decisions, and responses to the FtT, should explain, based on evidence specific to the
claimant, and generic published evidence, why it is considered that


1. it is reasonable to assess the claimant’s ability to mobilise with a manual wheelchair if they do not have
one and


2. the use of a manual wheelchair by the claimant promotes the underlying purpose of the WCA.


G1071 The underlying purpose of the WCA is to assess a person’s functionality i.e. what they can do in
the modern workplace, and enable them to engage in the labour market where appropriate. People who
can use aids such as a manual wheelchair to mobilise, if working in a fully accessible area, are not limited
in their capability for some types of work if they are unable to walk. Manual wheelchairs are widely
available. It is therefore reasonable to assess a person as if using a manual wheelchair for the required
distances where appropriate.
Example 1


Vincent has mobility problems after an accident at work affecting his right foot. He also suffers from
asthma, diabetes and depression. He claimed UC after being medically retired from his job as a van
driver. At the face-to-face assessment, Vincent told the HCP that the pain in his ankle stopped him from
walking more than short distances using crutches. He went round the supermarket slowly leaning on a
shopping trolley, or using an electric wheelchair trolley. When on holiday recently he had been given a
wheelchair to get around the airport which his wife had pushed, and he spent his holiday at the hotel or
on coach trips. He had not asked to be assessed for a wheelchair as he had nowhere to keep it; he lived in
a first floor flat over a shop.


The HCP advises that Vincent has no upper body problem, and the asthma and diabetes are controlled
by medication. He should not have any difficulty using a manual wheelchair independently for more than
200 metres. Although Vincent claimed he had problems with standing and sitting, he was able to sit for
more than an hour without significant discomfort. His depression is treated with mild anti-depressants,
and did not affect his functions to the extent that any mental or cognitive descriptor applied. The DM
determines that it was reasonable to assess Vincent’s mobility as if he had a manual wheelchair, and
there was no reason why he could not obtain one through the NHS wheelchair service if he needed one
to use at work, where it could be stored. Vincent is found not to have LCW.


Example 2


Sasje suffered from injuries to her head and legs in a road traffic accident. She claimed UC after being
discharged from hospital. At the face-to-face assessment, her mother told the HCP that Sasje is still
unable to walk more than a few steps. She pushes Sasje about in a manual wheelchair supplied by the
NHS wheelchair service. Sasje was not given a self-propelled wheelchair, as the wheelchair assessment
had identified that she had poor road safety and spatial awareness, possibly as a result of the head injury.


The DM accepts the HCP’s recommendation that Sasje is unable to mobilise 50 metres without help, and
also requires supervision when in the wheelchair to ensure she does not put herself or others in danger.
The DM determines that Sasje satisfies Sch 6 Activity 1(a)(i) (15 points) and 12(c) (6 points), as well as Sch
7 Activity 1(a). She is placed in the support group.


G1072 - G1074
Information requirements G1075 - G1080



The questionnaire G1076




G1075 The information required to determine whether a claimant has LCW or LCWRA is


1. any information relating to the descriptors that may be requested in the form of a questionnaire and


2. any additional information that may be requested1.


Note: See G1079 – G1081 for guidance on the role of medical services in information gathering.


                                                                          1 UC Regs, reg 43(1) & Sch 6 & 7


Note: Information may be required in order to assess the Severe Conditions Criteria. Please see chapter
G4 and G4062 for further information.



The questionnaire

G1076 Where the DM is satisfied there is sufficient information to determine whether a claimant has

LCW or LCWRA without the questionnaire, that information will not be required 1.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 43(2)


G1077 Claimants who are treated as having LCW (see ADM Chapter G2) are not required to complete a
questionnaire for the purposes of determining LCW, but will be required to provide information relating
to the descriptors for LCWRA unless they are also treated as having LCWRA (see ADM Chapter G3).


G1078 The questionnaire is designed for the claimant to give as much information about their condition,
how it affects them in their daily functioning, and how they manage their condition.


G1079 Medical services


1. scrutinises evidence regarding a claimant’s condition and gives an opinion as to whether


      1.1 they are treated as having LCW or LCWRA


      1.2 in second or subsequent referrals they actually have LCW or LCWRA without requiring a
      medical examination


2. provides impartial medical advice on request.
G1080 Medical services is responsible for gathering any information required to support the WCA
process. This includes


1. sending the questionnaire (form UC50)


2. sending a reminder if the claimant does not reply within three weeks


3. deciding if further medical evidence is required from the claimant’s GP or health care professional.
The medical report G1093 - G1095



Second or subsequent referrals G1093 - G1095




G1081 Medical services provides an independent medical opinion on the claimant’s condition,
functionality and their ability to perform activities related to work. They do not provide a diagnostic
examination. The focus is on a claimant’s abilities rather than their disabilities. HCPs should provide
relevant information and good justification for their recommendations with regard to LCW and LCWRA.


G1082 In the main, medical reports are completed electronically. There is no requirement for the report

(form UC85) to be signed by the examining HCP1. However the report must identify the status of the
HCP, i.e. whether he or she is a doctor, a registered nurse, or a registered occupational therapist or
physiotherapist as in G1012.


                                                                                                 1 R(IB) 7/05


G1083 The personalised summary statement forms part of the report form where that is produced
electronically, and is also produced as a separate form. It is part of the evidence considered by the DM
when making determinations as to whether the claimant has LCW or LCWRA.


G1084 The personalised summary statement is a statement of facts and findings made by the HCP, and
is personal to the claimant. It gives the HCP the opportunity to


1. justify their recommendation on the LCW and LCWRA activities and descriptors and


2. explain where the recommendation conflicts with the claimant’s view of their condition.


G1085 The personalised summary statement should refer to all of the claimant’s health conditions, and
consider the combined impact where multiple conditions are present. This should reflect the consensus
of medical opinion. It should not introduce new information not already in the report form.


G1086 – G1089


G1090 The questionnaire, the medical report, and any other medical evidence obtained by medical
services, are referred to the DM to consider whether the claimant has LCW or LCWRA. There may be
differences between the answers from the claimant and the HCP.


Example


On the questionnaire Kevin indicates he can walk on level ground but cannot walk 200 metres. He also
indicates on the form that he can walk about 50 metres before he has to stop due to severe pain. On the
medical report the HCP should collect more evidence to identify the actual distance the claimant can
walk and the amount of pain and discomfort experienced and how that affects the daily functioning.


The DM then considers the merit of each answer and any other evidence. As with all evidence DMs have
to decide what weight to give to the content of the medical report.


Note: The report should be read as a whole and any concerns over inconsistent or improbable entries
addressed before a determination of LCW or LCWRA is made.


G1091 There should be no changes made to the content of the medical report other than of a very minor
nature e.g. a typing error, and these are to be carried out by the same HCP who completed the original
wherever possible. It is permissible for another approved HCP to make the amendment, having
consulted the author of the original report, for example to avoid unnecessary delay. However the HCP
making the amendment should make it clear that it has been made following consultation. Any other
additions or alterations should be provided in a separate document.


G1092 The medical report includes an opinion of a HCP approved by the Secretary of State on whether
any prescribed exceptional circumstances apply. The DM should consider that opinion when deciding

whether a claimant can be treated as having LCWRA if they do not satisfy the test from the descriptors 1
(see ADM Chapter G3).


                                                                 1 UC Regs, reg 40(1)(b) & (4) & Sch 9 para 5



Second or subsequent referrals

G1093 The medical report also includes advice on the period of time that should pass before a claimant
is reconsidered for the next WCA process. This advice is given in all cases but the DM can determine
afresh whether the claimant still has LCW in prescribed circumstances (see G1020 et seq). This may be
at a different time from the advice given on the medical report.


G1094 In second and subsequent referrals medical services will


1. provide confirmation of the assessments which reach or exceed the threshold to satisfy LCW or
LCWRA or


2. arrange for a HCP to examine all claimants who do not reach the threshold and provide a medical
report on their ability to perform the specified activities or


3. provide a recommendation on whether the claimant has LCWRA.


G1095 Not all claimants require an assessment in subsequent referrals. Medical services decides if LCW
or LCWRA can be assessed on scrutiny of the available evidence.
Failure to return the questionnaire G1096 - G1104



The Secretary of State’s duty G1097 - G1100


Questionnaire returned before good reason considered G1101 - G1104




G1096 A claimant is treated as not having LCW or LCWRA for failure to return the questionnaire without

a good reason1 if the Secretary of State can show that


1. the questionnaire was sent and


2. a further request was sent at least three weeks after the first letter and at least one week has passed

since then2 and


3. a good reason has not been given or accepted for delay beyond the period stated in 2. above.


                                                                            1 UC Regs, reg 43(3); 2 reg 43(4)



The Secretary of State’s duty

G1097 The DM needs to make sure that the Secretary of State has complied with the duty set out in the

legislation1 to send the questionnaire and the reminder to the claimant. The DM can accept that it has
been sent if there is a record of its issue and no indication that it was not properly addressed, stamped
and posted.


                                                                                              1 Inte Act 78, s 7


Has the questionnaire been sent
G1098 Care must be taken to identify the date the questionnaire was sent. The date of its issue is only an
indication of the date on which it was posted. The DM should consider whether the questionnaire

actually left the issuing office and was put into the external mail on the date recorded 1.


                                                                                                   1 R(IB) 1/00


Has the correct amount of time passed
G1099 The correct period of time must have passed since the first questionnaire was sent. The period of
time starts on the day after the questionnaire is sent and ends at midnight on the last day provided for. If
the questionnaire is posted to the claimant’s last known address, the date on which it is sent is the date it

was posted1.
                                                                 1 UC, PIP, JSA & ESA (D&A) Regs, reg 3(2)


Example


A questionnaire was sent to Jack on 7.10.13. A reminder is due and sent on 29.10.13. If he still does not
return the questionnaire, the first day on which the DM can consider whether he should be treated as not
having LCW is 6.11.13.


Good reason
G1100 If the DM concludes that the Secretary of State has complied with the duty set out in the
legislation, they may then go on to consider whether the claimant had a good reason for their failure to

return the questionnaire1 (see G1125 et seq).


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 43(3)



Questionnaire returned before good reason considered

G1101 As in G1096, the law imposes time limits on the Secretary of State in relation to the sending of the
questionnaire and the reminder. However, there is no law imposing a time limit on the claimant for the
return of the questionnaire. Sometimes the questionnaire is returned after the time limit imposed on the
Secretary of State but before the DM has considered whether there was a good reason for the earlier
failure to return the questionnaire. In these circumstances, the determination cannot be made because it
cannot be held that the claimant has failed to return the questionnaire. Instead, normal WCA action
should resume.


Example


A questionnaire was sent to Jayne on 1.7.14. This was not returned so a reminder was sent to her on
23.7.14. If the questionnaire is not returned, the first day on which the DM could consider making a
determination treating Jayne as not having LCW is 31.7.14. The DM obtains the case on 11.8.14 to make
the determination, but notes that the questionnaire had been received in the office on 6.8.14. The DM
cannot make the determination treating Jayne as not having LCW because she has not failed to return
the questionnaire. Instead, normal WCA action resumes.


G1102 – G1104
Medical examination G1105 - G1124



General G1105


Failure to attend or submit to a medical examination G1106 - G1116


Failure to submit G1117 - G1124




General

G1105 Claimants may be called to attend a medical examination by a HCP approved by the Secretary of

State where it has to be determined whether they have LCW or LCWRA 1. The purpose of the medical
examination is to enable the DM, with the benefit of a medical opinion, to determine whether a claimant
meets the threshold for LCW or LCWRA. The medical examination may be conducted in person, by
telephone or by video.


                                                                                       1 UC Regs, reg 44(1)


Note: Claimants may be called to attend a medical examination to assess the Severe Conditions Criteria.
See Chapter G4 and G4063 for more information.



Failure to attend or submit to a medical examination

G1106 Claimants can be treated as not having LCW or LCWRA if


1. they fail without a good reason to attend for or submit to a medical examination 1 and


2. they


      2.1 had at least seven days’ notice of the examination or


      2.2 agreed to accept a shorter period of notice2.


                                                                          1 UC Regs, reg 44(2); 2 reg 44(3)


G1107 Medical services


1. where possible contacts the claimant by telephone to arrange an appointment for the examination and
2. keeps a detailed record of the date, time and place of the examination agreed with the claimant and


3. issues written notice to confirm the arrangement (unless the claimant has agreed to accept a shorter
period of notice).


The Secretary of State’s duty
G1108 Unless the claimant has agreed to accept a shorter period of notice, when considering whether a
claimant should be treated as not having LCW or LCWRA, the DM has to be satisfied that the Secretary

of State has complied with the duty set out in the legislation 1, that


1. a notice was sent and


2. the notice included the time and place of the examination and


3. the notice was sent at least seven days before the date of the examination and


4. the examination had not been cancelled.


                                                                                    1 UC Regs, reg 44(3)(a)


G1109 If, after calculating the period of time which passed between the date the notice was sent and the

time of the examination, the DM decides that seven days had not elapsed 1, they should consider whether
the claimant has agreed to accept a shorter period of notice. If there is no evidence that the claimant had
agreed to accept a shorter period of notice the claimant cannot be treated as not having LCW.


                                                                                    1 UC Regs, reg 44(3)(a)


G1110 Where the claimant has agreed to accept a shorter period of notice the DM considers the

appropriate amount of time agreed between medical services and the claimant 1. Medical services always
send a confirmation of the date, time and venue of the appointment whether or not this has been agreed
in a telephone call with the claimant.


                                                                                    1 UC Regs, reg 44(3)(b)


G1111 Only one rescheduled appointment can be offered during a WCA referral. If the claimant cannot
attend the rescheduled appointment, medical services will record that the claimant has failed to attend.
The DM will have to consider the reasons why the claimant cannot attend and consider whether this was
because of a good reason (see G1125 et seq).


G1112 If the DM cannot confirm that the provisions in G1108 were met, the claimant cannot be treated as
not having LCW or LCWRA.


Note: Medical services can provide evidence of notification for requests from DMs who are considering
revision or supersession of disallowance determinations and preparing appeal responses.
Has notice been sent
G1113 The DM needs to be sure that the claimant has been sent notice. The DM can accept that it has
been sent if there is a record of its issue and no indication that it was not properly addressed, stamped

and posted1. In addition the DM should make sure that the notice was in writing and included the time
and place of the medical examination unless the claimant had agreed to accept a shorter period of
notice. Medical services always send a confirmation of the date, time and venue of the appointment
whether or not this has been agreed in a telephone call with the claimant.


                                                                                           1 Inte Act 78, s 7


Have seven days passed
G1114 Where there is no evidence that the claimant agreed to accept a shorter period of notice, the DM
needs to be sure that the correct period of notice has been given. The DM has to decide when the notice
was sent. The day after is day one. Seven clear days of notice have to pass before the date of the

examination1.


                                                                                                1 R(IB) 1/00


Example 1


A letter giving the time and place of a medical examination is prepared and placed in the post tray at 3pm
on Friday 1st. Because of the timing of the internal post collection it does not reach the post room until
Monday lunchtime and leaves the office in the external mail on Monday at 5pm. The appointment is
timed for Monday 11th. The recipient does not attend. It is not possible to treat the claimant as not having
LCW because if Tuesday 5th is Day one, Monday 11th is Day seven and they have not received seven
days clear notice.


Example 2


A letter giving the time and place of a medical examination leaves the office on Wednesday 6th. The
appointment is timed for Thursday 14th. The recipient does not attend. Subject to good reason the
claimant is treated as not having LCW because Thursday 7th is Day one, Thursday 14th is Day eight and
they have received at least seven days clear notice.


Has the appointment been cancelled


G1115 Claimants cannot fail to attend the medical examination if the appointment had already been
cancelled by medical services. The DM should investigate any indications that the claimant had made
contact with the issuing office before the time of the examination. This is so that they can satisfy
themselves that the appointment had been left open for the claimant.


Good reason
G1116 If the DM concludes that the Secretary of State has complied with the duty set out in G1108 they
may go on to consider whether the claimant had a good reason for their failure to attend to medical
examination.



Failure to submit

G1117 Where a claimant attends a WCA but fails to participate in the process the assessment is
terminated. This may happen where a claimant


1. refuses to be examined or


2. poses a threat to staff or others or


3. shows inappropriate or threatening behaviour or


4. shows intoxication from alcohol or substance abuse or


5. is persistently uncooperative.


G1118 Medical services will record a full and detailed account of the claimant’s behaviour and refer to the
DM to decide whether the claimant should be treated as not having LCW or LCWRA due to a failure to
submit to an examination.


G1119 If a claimant makes it clear after going to the examination that they will not be medically examined

then that constitutes a failure to submit to an examination 1.


                                                                                                1 R(IB) 1/01


G1120 A claimant fails to submit to an examination not only by refusing to be examined but also if that
claimant seeks to impose as a condition of being examined a term which would render the examination
useless for the purpose for which it is required.


Example


The claimant requests the medical report should not be passed to a layman, including a DM, insisting on
complete confidentiality. By imposing such a condition the examination becomes useless for the
purposes for which it was required and the claimant is failing to submit to an examination.


Good reason
G1121 If the DM concludes that the Secretary of State has complied with the duty set out in G1108 they
may go on to consider whether the claimant had a good reason for their failure to submit to a medical
examination (see G1125 et seq).


G1122 – G1124
Consideration of good reason G1125 - G1999
Good reason - some scenarios G1128 - G1999




G1125 The claimant will have been asked to give the reasons for not complying with the Secretary of
State’s request for information or to attend or submit for examination. The DM should bear in mind the
guidance about considering evidence in ADM Chapter A1 (Principles of decision making and evidence).


G1126 The onus of proving good reason lies with the claimant who fails to comply. The test of good
reason is whether the DM judges the reason for non-return or non-attendance or failure to submit to be
reasonable and likely on the balance of probabilities.


G1127 The DM may determine that a claimant is treated as not having LCW if


1. they have failed to


      1.1 return the questionnaire or


      1.2. attend or submit for examination and


3. they have


      3.1 not replied to enquiries or


      3.2 given an explanation that does not amount to a good reason.



Good reason - some scenarios

G1128 Any reasons given for the non-return of the questionnaire should be judged on the balance of
probabilities. Whether the reasons for delay amount to good reason depends upon whether the DM
considers, for example,


1. it was reasonable not to return the questionnaire on this occasion or


2. if non receipt by the office or claimant was more probable than not.


G1129 If a claimant says that they were too ill to attend because of the nature of their disability, the DM
should ask for evidence to support this. If the claimant is usually able to get out, for example to the
doctor or hospital, good reason should only be accepted if it is unreasonable to expect the claimant to
have attended on that occasion. Exceptionally, a claimant may be examined at home if they are unable to
travel.


G1130 A claimant may say they were too ill to attend because of a condition unrelated to their disability,
for example they may say that they had flu at the time of the appointment. If the DM accepts the
evidence, the claimant has a good reason for their non-attendance.


G1131 Good cause (or reason) was not accepted in a case where a claimant had tried to avoid attending
several examinations by submitting final certificates. In the particular circumstances the final certificate

was irrelevant because it was replaced by an open statement which included the day of the examination 1.


                                                                                                1 R(S) 12/59


G1132 If the claimant contends that they did not receive the notice of the appointment, DMs should
satisfy themselves that the notice was sent. The DM should give consideration to the date on which the
written notice was posted, the time sufficient to show whether or not it would have been collected from
the post box, the address to which it was posted and whether by first or second class post. The DM
should also be satisfied the letter has not been returned undelivered.


G1133 The DM will normally need better evidence of the address to which it was posted than a later
computer generated print out showing the address on the file at that later date. If there is no evidence to
show whether first or second class post was used the DM should assume that second class post was
used. If it was sent it can be assumed it was delivered unless there is evidence to the contrary.


G1134 Where the claimant says the postal difficulties are specific to them or their address, all of their
circumstances are to be given fair consideration. They will have to show that they have done enough to
ensure as far as is reasonably possible that they receive their mail, special care may be expected in the
cases of accommodation addresses and premises in multiple occupation.


G1135 Sometimes it may be right to reject a claimant’s allegation of non-receipt where the excuse
extends to a number of letters, or is coupled with suspicious circumstances, or if the non-receipt of mail
is selective so that only certain letters are not received. However the uncontradicted evidence of the
non-receipt of a single letter in plausible circumstances, such as the communal delivery of mail to
particular premises where another person went through the mail before the claimant had a chance to do
so may establish a good reason.


G1136 DMs can see all changes of address and when the changes were effective from in the relevant
medical services computer system to help them decide where the questionnaire was sent and when.


G1137 If a claimant attends but refuses to have a physical examination, for example because of
genuinely held religious beliefs, the DM should normally accept a good reason unless it is evident that the
refusal is based on a prejudice against or distaste for the examination rather than because of a particular

belief1.


                                                                                                    1 R(S) 9/51


G1138 It is possible for the DM to consider that a claimant did not have a good reason for failure to
submit to an examination because of drunkenness, drug abuse or other problem behaviour. However if
the behaviour is a symptom of the stated medical condition such as alcoholism, rather than an isolated
occurrence, the claimant may have a good reason.


G1139 If a claimant did not attend for medical examination because a consultant advised that
attendance was not necessary, that does not show a good reason for failing to attend for medical
examination. Irrespective of the claimant’s medical advisor’s opinion as to LCW or LCWRA, a claimant is
obliged to abide by the rules for claiming benefit.


G1140 A failure to comply with a notice to attend a medical examination will usually be deliberate, except
in cases where, through mental illness or disablement, the claimant is unable to make a choice between
attendance and non-attendance. The question is whether there is a good reason for the deliberate failure
to comply with the notice.


G1141 – G1999


The content of the examples in this document (including use of imagery) is for illustrative purposes
only
